*, , MAndLA, ,
mandel

,SA GZHI SPOS KYIS BYUGS SHING ME TOG BKRAM,
sashi pukyi jukshing metok tram,

,RI RAB GLING BZHI NYI ZLAS BRGYAN PA 'DI,
rirab lingshi nyinde gyenpa di,

,SANGS RGYAS ZHING DU DMIGS TE DBUL BAR BGYI,
sangye shingdu mikte ulwar gyi,

,'GRO KUN RNAM DAG ZHING LA SPYOD PAR SHOG, ,
drokun namdak shingla chupar shok.

,AI Dm GU RU RA{tn} MAnd LA Km NI{ry}'A TA YA MI, ,
Idam guru ratna mandalakam niryatayami.
Offering the Mandala
Here is the great Earth,
Filled with the smell of incense,
Covered with a blanket of flowers,
The Great Mountain,
The Four Continents,
Wearing a jewel
Of the Sun, and Moon.
In my mind I make them
The Paradise of a Buddha,
And offer it all to You.
By this deed
May every living being
Experience
The Pure World.
Idam guru ratna mandalakam niryatayami.

*, , SKYABS 'GRO SEMS BSKYED, ,
kyabdro semkye

,SANGS RGYAS CHOS DANG TSOGS KYI MCHOG RNAMS LA,
sangye chudang tsokyi choknam la,

,BYANG CHUB BAR DU BDAG NI SKYABS SU MCHIS,
jangchub bardu dakni kyabsu chi,

,BDAG GIS SBYIN SOGS BGYIS PA'I BSOD NAMS KYIS,
dakki jinsok gyipay sunam kyi,

,'GRO LA PHAN PHYIR SANGS RGYAS 'GRUB PAR SHOG, ,
drola penchir sangye druppar shok.
Refuge and The Wish
I go for refuge
To the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha
Until I achieve enlightenment.
By the power
Of the goodness that I do
In giving and the rest,
May I reach Buddhahood
For the sake
Of every living being.
 *, , BSNGO BA, ,
ngowa

,DGE BA 'DI YIS SKYE BO KUN,
gewa diyi kyewo kun,

,BSOD NAMS YE SHES TSOGS RDZOGS SHING ,
sunam yeshe tsok-dzok shing,

,BSOD NAMS YE SHES LAS BYUNG BA'I,
sunam yeshe lejung way,

,DAM PA SKU GNYIS 'THOB PAR SHOG, ,
dampa kunyi topar shok.
Dedication of the Goodness of a Deed
By the goodness
Of what I have just done
May all beings
Complete the collection
Of merit and wisdom,
And thus gain the two
Ultimate bodies
That merit and wisdom make.

*, , MCHOD PA, ,
chupa

,STON PA BLA MED SANGS RGYAS RIN PO CHE,
tonpa lame sanggye rinpoche,

,SKYOB PA BLA MED DAM CHOS RIN PO CHE,
kyoppa lame damchu rinpoche,

,'DREN PA BLA MED DGE 'DUN RIN PO CHE,
drenpa lame gendun rinpoche,

,SKYABS GNAS DKON MCHOG GSUM LA MCHOD PA 'BUL,
kyabne konchok sumla chupa bul.
A Buddhist Grace
I offer this
To the Teacher
Higher than any other,
The precious Buddha.
I offer this
To the protection
Higher than any other,
The precious Dharma.
I offer this
To the guides
Higher than any other,
The precious Sangha.
I offer this
To the places of refuge,
To the Three Jewels,
Rare and supreme.

THE ASIAN CLASSICS
INSTITUTE
The Asian Classics Institute
Course I: The Principal Teachings of Buddhism
Level One of The Steps to Buddhahood (Lam Rim)
Course Syllabus
Reading One
Subject: An introduction to the Three Principal Paths
Reading: The complete root text of the Three Principal Paths (Lam-stzo rnam-gsum)
by Je Tsongkapa (1357-1419)
Forward to the English translation of Pabongka Rinpoche's
commentary on the Three Principal Paths by Khen Rinpoche Geshe
Lobsang Tharchin (1921-)
Reading Two
Subject: The Lama and the Word; Why Learn the Three Principal Paths?; An
Offering of Praise
Reading: The Key that Unlocks the Door to the Noble Path (Lam bzang sgo 'byed)
written by Pabongka Rinpoche (1878-1941), a commentary upon the
Three Principal Paths (Lam-gtzo rnam-gsum) of Je Tsongkapa (1357-1419),
folios 1a-5b.
Reading Three
Subject: How to Take a Lama
Reading: The Key that Unlocks the Door to the Noble Path, folios 5b-7b.
Reading Four
Subject: A Pledge to Compose the Work
Reading: The Key that Unlocks the Door to the Noble Path, folios 7b-10b.

Course I: The Principal Teachings of Buddhism
Course Syllabus
Reading Five
Subject: Encouragement to Study; Why You Need Renunciation; Stopping
Desire for This Life
Reading: The Key that Unlocks the Door to the Noble Path, folios 10b-18b.
Reading Six
Subject: Stopping Desire for Future Lives; How to Know When You've Found
Renunciation
Reading: The Key that Unlocks the Door to the Noble Path, folios 18b-22b.
Reading Seven
Subject: Why You Need the Wish for Enlightenment
Reading: The Key that Unlocks the Door to the Noble Path, folios 22b-23b.
Reading Eight
Subject: How to Develop the Wish for Enlightenment; How to Know When
You've Found the Wish for Enlightenment
Reading: The Key that Unlocks the Door to the Noble Path, folios 23b-29a.
Reading Nine
Subject: Why You Need Correct View; What is Correct View?
Reading: The Key that Unlocks the Door to the Noble Path, folios 29a-35a.
Reading Ten
Subject: How to Know When Your Analysis is Still Incomplete; How to Know
When Your Analysis is Complete; A Unique Teaching of the
"Implication" School; Put Into Practice What You Have Learned; The
Conclusion of the Explanation; A Disciple's Prayer; A Secret Key to the
Three Principal Paths
Reading: The Key that Unlocks the Door to the Noble Path, folios 35a-41a.

1
The Asian Classics Institute
Course I: The Principal Teachings of Buddhism
Reading One

*, , RJE BTZUN CHOS KYI RGYAL PO TZONG KHA PA CHEN POS MDZAD PA'I 
LAM GYI GTZO BO RNAM GSUM BZHUGS SO, ,
Herein contained is the
"Three Principal Paths"
written by Tsongkapa the Great, King of the Dharma

*, , RJE BTZUN 'JAM PA'I DBYANGS LA PHYAG 'TSAL LO,
I bow to all the high and holy lamas.

,RGYAL BA'I GSUNG RAB KUN GYI SNYING PO'I DON,
,RGYAL SRAS DAM PA RNAMS KYIIS BSNGAGS PA'I LAM,
,SKAL LDAN THAR 'DOD RNAMS KYI 'JUG NGOGS DE,
,JI LTAR NUS BZHIN BDAG GIS BSHAD PAR BYA,
As far as I am able I'll explain
The essence of all high teachings of the Victors,
The path that all their holy sons commend,
The entry point for the fortunate seeking freedom.

,GANG DAG SRID PA'I BDE LA MA CHAGS SHING,
,DAL 'BYOR DON YOD BYA PHYIR BRTZON PA YIS,
,RGYAL BA DGYES PA'I LAM LA YID RTON PA'I,
,SKAL LDAN DE DAG DVANG BA'I YID KYIS NYON,
Listen with a pure mind, fortunate ones
Who have no craving for the pleasures of life,
And who, to make leisure and fortune meaningful, strive
To turn their minds to the path which pleases the Victors.

,RNAM DAG NGES 'BYUNG MED PAR SRID MTSO YI,
,BDE 'BRAS DON GNYER ZHI BA'I THABS MED LA,
,SRID LA BRKAM PA YIS KYANG LUS CAN RNAMS,
,KUN NAS 'CHING PHYIR THOG MAR NGES 'BYUNG BTZAL,
There's no way to end, without pure renunciation,
This striving for pleasant results in the ocean of life.
It's because of their hankering life as well that beings
Are fettered, so seek renunciation first.

,DAL 'BYOR RNYED DKA' TSE LA LONG MED PA,
,YID LA GOMS PAS TSE 'DI'I SNANG SHAS 
LOG,LAS 'BRAS MI BSLU 'KHOR BA'I SDUG BSNGAL RNAMS,
,YANG YANG BSAM NA PHYI MA'I SNANG SHAS 
Leisure and fortune are hard to find, life's not long;
Think it constantly, stop desire for this life.
Think over and over how deeds and their fruits never fail,
And the cycle's suffering: stop desire for the future.

LDOG,DE LTAR GOMS PAS 'KHOR BA'I PHUN TSOGS LA,
,YID SMON SKAD CIG TZAM YANG MI SKYE ZHING ,
,NYIN MTSAN KUN TU THAR PA DON GNYER BLO,
,BYUNG NA DE TSE NGES 'BYUNG SKYES PA LAGS,
When you've meditated thus and feel not even
A moment's wish for the goods things of cyclic life,
And when you begin to think both night and day
Of achieving freedom, you've found renunciation.

,NGES 'BYUNG DE YANG RNAM DAG SEMS BSKYED SKYIS,
,ZIN PA MED NA BLA MED BYANG CHUB KYI,
,PHUN TSOGS BDE BA'I RGYU RU MI 'GYUR BAS,
,BLO LDAN RNAMS KYIS BYANG CHUB SEMS MCHOG BSKYED,
Renunciation though, can never bring
The total bliss of matchless Buddhahood
Unless it's bound by the purest wish; and so,
The wise seek the high wish for enlightenment.

,SHUGS DRAG CHU BO BZHI YI RGYUN GYIS KHYER,
,ZLOG DKA' LAS KYI 'CHING BA DAM POS BSDAMS,
,BDAG 'DZIN LCAGS KYI DRA BA'I SBUBS SU TSUD,
,MA RIG MUN PA'I SMAG CHEN KUN NAS 'THIBS,
,MU MED SRID PAR SKYE ZHING SKYE BA RU,
,SDUG BSNGAL GSUM GYIS RGYUN CHAD MED PAR MNAR,
,GNAS SKABS 'DI 'DRAR GYUR PA'I MA RNAMS KYI,
,NGANG TSUL BSAMS NAS SEMS MCHOG BSKYED PAR MDZOD,
They're swept along on four fierce river currents,
Chained up tight in past deeds, hard to undo,
Stuffed in a steel cage of grasping "self,"
Smothered in the pitch-black ignorance.
In a limitless round they're born, and in their births
Are tortured by three sufferings without a break;
Think how your mothers feel, think of what's happening
To them: try to develop this highest wish.

,GNAS LUGS RTOGS PA'I SHES RAB MI LDAN NA,
,NGES 'BYUNG BYANG CHUB SEMS LA GOMS BYAS KYANG ,
,SRID PA'I RTZA BA BCAD PAR MI NUS PAS,
,DE PHYIR RTEN 'BREL RTOGS PA'I THABS LA 'BAD,
You may master renunciation and the wish,
But unless you have the wisdom perceiving reality
You cannot cut the root of cyclic life.
Make efforts in ways then to perceive interdependence.

,GANG ZHIG 'KHOR 'DAS CHOS RNAMS THAMS CAD KYI,
,RGYU 'BRAS NAM YANG BSLU BA MED MTHONG ZHING ,
,DMIGS PA'I GTAD SO GANG YIN KUN ZHIG PA,
,DE NI SANGS RGYAS DGYES PA'I LAM LA ZHUGS,
A person's entered the path that pleases the Buddhas
When for all objects, in the cycle or beyond,
He sees that cause and effect can never fail,
And when for him they lose all solid appearance.

,SNANG BA RTEN 'BREL BSLU BA MED PA DANG,
,STONG PA KHAS LEN BRAL BA'I GO BA GNYIS,
,JI SRID SO SOR SNANG BA DE SRID DU,
,DA DUNG THUB PA'I DGONGS PA RTOGS PA MED,
You've yet to realize the thought of the Able
As long as two ideas seem to you disparate:
The appearance of things--infallible interdependence;
And emptiness--beyond taking any position.

,NAM ZHIG RE 'JOG MED PAR CIG CAR DU,
,RTEN 'BREL MI BSLUR MTHONG BA TZAM NYID NAS,
,NGES SHES YUL GYI 'DZIN STANGS KUN 'JIG NA,
,DE TSE LTA BA'I DPYAD PA RDZOGS PA LAGS,
At some point they no longer alternate, come together;
Just seeing that interdependence never fails
Brings realization that destroys how you hold to objects,
And then your analysis with view is complete.

,GZHAN YANG SNANG BAS YOD MTHA' SEL BA DANG ,
,STONG PAS MED MTHA' SEL ZHING STONG PA NYID,
,RGYU DANG 'BRAS BUR 'CHAR BA'I TSUL SHES NA,
,MTHAR 'DZIN LTA BA'I 'PHROG PAR MI 'GYUR RO,
In addition, the appearance prevents the existence extreme;
Emptiness that of non-existence, and if
You see how emptiness shows in cause and effect
You'll never be stolen off by extreme views.

,DE LTAR LAM GYI GTZO BO RNAM GSUM GYI,
,GNAD RNAMS RANG GI JI BZHIN RTOGS PA'I TSE,
,DBEN PA BSTEN TE BRTZON 'GRUS STOBS BSKYED NAS,
,GTAN GYI MDUN MA MYUR DU SGRUBS SHIG BU,
When you've grasped as well as I the essential points
Of each of the three principal paths explained,
Then go into isolation, my son, make mighty
Efforts, and quickly win your ultimate wish.

ZHES PA 'DI NI MANG DU THOS PA'I DGE SLONG BLO BZANG GRAGS PA'I DPAL GYIS TSA KHO DBON PO NGAG DBANG GRAGS PA LA GDAMS PA'O, ,
These instructions were imparted to Ngawang Drakpa, a friar from the Tsako district,
by that very learned Buddhist monk, the glorious Lobsang Drakpa.

The following text is a forward written by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Lobsang
Tharchin (1921- ) for the English translation of Pabongka Rinpoche's
commentary on the Three Principal Paths (Lam-gtzo rnam-gsum) entitled The Key
that Unlocks the Door to the Noble Path (Lam bzang sgo 'byed).
************
Yeshe Lobsang was sitting as usual, staring at the ceiling, with his mouth wide
open. We were young monks in Sera, one of the greatest Buddhist monasteries
of Tibet. We sat in long rows facing each other, chanting one of the holiest
prayers of our religion--the Offering to Lamas.
He was a full ten feet away, still day-dreaming with the wide-open mouth. I
was the class cut-up, smart, but with a mischievous streak that got worse
around some of my irreverent playmates. Two were sitting with me, one to
each side, and not concentrating much on the prayer either. I made them a bet
that I could hit Yeshe Lobsang right in the mouth.
We had this game called pakda, which means "the arrow of dough." You take
a little ball of barley dough and flick it with your middle finger. This was the
sort of thing I was good at, since I didn't waste much time studying, as I was
supposed to.
Yeshe Lobsang was still slack-jaw, giving a good target. As the chanting rose
to a crescendo I took aim and fired--the dough ball not only reached his
mouth but shot right through to the back, and made a tremendous satisfying
THWOCK! sound as it hit. And so he starts choking and spitting, and my
friends on each side are roaring with laughter.
Up comes the Gergen, our housemaster who's supposed to keep an eye on us
young ones during the ceremonies, and spots the offenders (they're still
laughing; I kept a good straight face through the whole thing). He carries a
small stick for just such occasions, and begins laying it on them from the back
of the row. They start crying but they can't stop laughing, and get a good
beating, and Yeshe Lobsang is still choking, and I'm sitting like a good young
monk and get away scot-free. They told me later it was worth the beating to
see Yeshe Lobsang's face all screwed up, and they didn't bear me a grudge that
I got off free.
This little scene was very typical of my early years at Sera. Like many Tibetan
boys, I was put into the monastery at a young age--this was in 1928, when I
was only seven. At first we miss our parents and brothers and sisters, but then
again our house in the monastery was a wonderful place for a boy--we would
be with about fifty other boys our own age, which made for tremendous

entertainment when we could get away with it, and also a deep feeling of
brotherhood as we passed through the rigorous 25-year course together, and
finally graduated with the coveted degree of "geshe"--master of Buddhist
learning.
My own house was Gyalrong, which was one of the larger of about fifteen
houses in Sera Mey College, itself one of the three great divisions of Sera
Monastery. At its peak, Sera had over 8,000 teachers and disciples studying
the ancient books of Buddhist wisdom.
Our monastery was located just outside of Lhasa, the capital of Tibet, which
is the mountainous kingdom surrounded by Mount Everest and the rest of the
Himalayas, north of India and west of China. Although the Buddha was born
in India, Tibet is where his complete teachings have survived up to the present
day. They were brought to our country over a thousand years ago, translated
carefully into our language and kept safe in our mountain monasteries, while
in the outside world the Buddhist books and monasteries and monks
themselves have nearly disappeared, advocates of total non-violence in a
violent world.
We young monks were not so noble. My house tutor would send us up to the
rock cliffs behind the monastery with buckets to fetch water from the spring
there, and we would dawdle for hours. Sometimes we would tuck our feet
into our maroon-colored robes and slide down the long boulders until the cloth
was ripped to shreds, and again the housemaster would give us our lumps.
Rock-throwing was a good way to waste time, and I remember once hitting a
lizard, and killing him by accident, and feeling terrible regret. For we believe
that all living creatures have feelings; that they seek to feel good and avoid
pain the same way you and I do.
On our way back to the monastery, a favorite trick was to lay out tacks on the
path leading into the front gate. Our country lay in sort of a pocket behind the
Himalayas, and was not as cold as most people imagine the "Land of Snows"
should be. Some of the monks enjoyed going barefoot, and we would stoop
behind the wall near the gate, waiting for a victim. Our giggles would start
breaking out even before his feet reached the tacks, and then we would race
away, robes flapping and flying in the wind, before he could come and catch
us.
Even at home I was not the model student. My house tutor, the one who
usually teaches us reading and writing before we begin our formal
philosophical studies, was Geshe Tupten Namdrol. He was very strict with me
and the other boy who shared our rooms. This boy was a notorious goof-off,
and started to affect me too. As we entered our first courses in Buddhist logic

and debate, I went through all the motions--I gave my exams well, memorized
what I was supposed to, and quickly grasped the principles of reasoning--but
my heart wasn't in it. By the time we began the next course, twelve long years
on the meaning of Wisdom, I had gained a rather bad reputation.
Around this time my house tutor was offered the abbotship of a monastery
named Ganden Shedrup Ling, in the district of Hloka, fairly far south of the
capital. It was a great honor, for the position had been granted by the
Kashak--the High Council of the Tibetan Government--and approved
personally by the Dalai Lama, who is the great spiritual and temporal leader
of our land. The post would bring with it a substantial income which I, as
Geshe Namdrol's right-hand man, would share. Everyone thought this would
be a good chance for me to get ahead and also bow out gracefully from the
tough course of study that lay before me, and which it seemed I might never
complete.
It was at this time that the glorious Pabongka Rinpoche, the author of the
commentary you are about to read, came into my life. Like me he had as a
young man taken his course of studies at the Sera Mey College of Sera
Monastery; in fact, he was from the same house, Gyalrong.
Pabongka Rinpoche was born in 1878, at a town called Tsawa Li in the Yeru
Shang district of the state of Tsang, north of Lhasa. His family were of the
nobility and owned a modest estate called Chappel Gershi. As a child he
exhibited unusual qualities and in his seventh year was taken before Sharpa
Chuje Lobsang Dargye, one of the leading religious figures of the day.
The lama felt sure that the boy must be a reincarnated saint, and even went so
far as to examine him to see if he were the rebirth of his own late teacher. He
was not, but the sage foretold that if the child were placed in the Gyalrong
House of Sera Mey College, something wonderful would happen with him in
the future.
Later on, the youngster was found to be a reincarnation of the Changkya line,
which included the illustrious scholar Changkya Rolpay Dorje (1717-1786).1
The lamas of this line had done much teaching in the regions of Mongolia and
China--even in the court of the Chinese emperor himself--and the name
"Changkya" had very strong Chinese connotations. Already in those days the
Tibetan government and people were sensitive to the pressures put on us by
our powerful neighbor to the east, so the name "Changkya" was ruled out, and
the boy declared to be "Pabongka" instead.
Pabongka, also known as Parongka, is a large and famous rock-formation
about three miles' walk from our Sera Monastery. The very word "pabong"

means in our language a large boulder, or mass of rock. The place is
historically very important for Tibetans, for perched on top of the rock is the
palace of Songtsen Gampo, the 7th-Century king who made Tibet one of the
leading nations of Asia at the time, and who helped bring the first Buddhist
teachings from India.
Until Songtsen Gampo's time, the Tibetans had no written language. The king,
who desired that the great texts of Buddhism be translated into our language,
sent a number of delegations to India with the charge of bringing back a
written alphabet. Many of the young men who went died in the terrible rainy
heat of the Indian plains and jungles, so different from our high Tibetan
plateau, but the minister Tonmi Sambhota finally returned. He proceeded to
create an alphabet and grammatical system that last to this day. And it is said
that he performed this great labor in the palace of Songtsen Gampo, atop the
cliffs of Pabongka.
Pabongka Rinpoche was actually the second Pabongka, for it was finally
agreed to announce that he had been recognized as the reincarnation of the
Kenpo (or abbot) of the small monastery atop the rock. For this reason he was
sometimes referred to as "Pabongka Kentrul," or the "reincarnation of the abbot
of Pabongka." Pabongka Rinpoche's full name, by the way, was Kyabje
Pabongkapa Jetsun Jampa Tenzin Trinley Gyatso Pel Sangpo, which translates
as the "lord protector, the one from Pabongka, the venerable and glorious
master whose name is the Loving One, Keeper of the Buddha's Teachings,
Ocean of the Mighty Deeds of the Buddha." He is also popularly known as
"Dechen Nyingpo," which means "Essence of Great Bliss" and refers to his
mastery of the secret teachings of Buddhism. We Tibetans feel that it is
disrespectful to refer to a great religious leader with what we call his "bare"
name--such as "Tsongkapa" or "Pabongka"--but we have tried here to simplify
the Tibetan names to help our Western readers.
Pabongka Rinpoche's career at Sera Mey College was not outstanding; he did
finish his geshe degree, but reached only the "lingse" rank, which means that
he was examined just at his own monastery and did not go on for one of the
higher ranks such as "hlarampa." The hlarampa level requires an exhausting
series of public examinations and debates at different monasteries, culminating
in a session before the Dalai Lama and his teachers at the Norbulingka summer
palace. It was only after his graduation from Sera Mey, and the success of his
teaching tours through the countryside outside the capital, that Pabongka
Rinpoche's fame started to spread. Gradually he began to build up a huge
following and displayed tremendous abilities as a public teacher. He was not
tall (as I remember about my height, and I am only 5'6"), but he was broad-
chested and seemed to fill the entire teaching throne when he climbed up on
it to begin his discourse.

His voice was incredibly powerful. On many occasions he would address
gatherings of many thousands of people, yet everyone could hear him clearly
(in those days in Tibet we had never heard of microphones or loudspeakers).
Part of the trick of course was to pack the audience in Tibetan-style, cross-
legged on the floor, with the lama on an elevated platform. Still the audience
would flow out onto the porch of the hall, and sit perched above on the roof,
watching through the steeple windows.
Pabongka Rinpoche had an uncanny ability to relate to his audience, and for
this reason he became a teacher for the common man as well as for us monks.
Generally speaking, the majority of the Buddha's teachings as we learn them
in the monastery are extremely detailed, deep and sometimes technical.
Moreover, we use rigorous tests of formal logic to analyze them as we move
up through our classes. These methods are important for gaining the highest
goals of Buddhist practice in a systematic way, and for passing these teachings
on to others. But they were beyond the abilities and time of many of our
Tibetan laymen. The Rinpoche's great accomplishment was that he found a
way to attract and lead listeners of every level.
His most famous weapon was his humor. Public discourses in Tibet could
sometimes go on for ten hours or more without a break, and only a great saint
could keep his attention up so long. Inevitably part of the audience would
start to nod, or fall into some reverie. Then Pabongka Rinpoche would
suddenly relate an amusing story or joke with a useful moral, and send his
listeners into peals of laughter. This would startle the day-dreamers, who were
always looking around and asking their neighbors to repeat the joke to them.
The effects on his audience were striking and immediate. I remember
particularly the case of Dapon Tsago, a member of the nobility who held a
powerful position equivalent to Minister of Defense. Public teachings in Tibet
were as much social as religious affairs, and aristocrats would show up in their
best finery, often it seemed not to hear the dharma but rather to put in an
appearance. So one day this great general marches in to the hall, decked out
in silk, his long hair flowing in carefully tailored locks (this was considered
manly and high fashion in old Tibet). A great ceremonial sword hung from
his belt, clanging importantly as he swaggered in.
By the end of the first section of the teaching he was seen leaving the hall
quietly, deep in thought--he had wrapped his weapon of war in a cloth to
hide it, and was taking it home. Later on we could see he had actually
trimmed off his warrior's locks, and finally one day he threw himself before
the Rinpoche and asked to be granted the special lifetime religious vows for
laymen. Thereafter he always followed Pabongka Rinpoche around, to every
public teaching he gave.

The Rinpoche had never spent much time at the small monastery atop the
Pabongka rock, and his fame soon reached such proportions that the Ngakpa
College of Sera Monastery offered him a large retreat complex on the hillside
above Pabongka. The name of this hermitage was Tashi Chuling, or
"Auspicious Spiritual Isle." There were some sixty Buddhist monks in
residence there, and as I remember about sixteen personal attendants who
helped the Lama with his pressing schedule: two monk-secretaries, a manager
for finances, and so on. The Rinpoche would divide his time between his
quarters here and a small meditation cell built around the mouth of a cave,
further up the side of the mountain.
The cave was known as Takden, and it was here that Pabongka Rinpoche
would escape for long periods to do his private practice and meditations. The
central chamber had a high vaulted ceiling, so high that the light of a regular
fire-torch could not even reach it, and the darkness seemed to go up forever.
In the center of the ceiling there was an odd natural triangle in the rock, which
looked exactly like the outer shape of one of the mystic worlds described in
our secret teachings.
In the corner of this wonderful cave, an underground spring flowed from a
rock--and above it was another natural drawing, this one just like the third eye
that we see painted on the forehead of one of our female Buddhas. By the
way, this "third eye" you hear about is largely metaphorical, and stands for the
spiritual understanding in one's heart. We believed the cave was home for a
dakini--sort of a Buddhist angel--because people often said they saw a
wondrous lady come from the cave, but no one had ever seen her enter.
It was in his private quarters at the Tashi Chuling hermitage that I first met
Pabongka Rinpoche. He had been away on an extended teaching tour in
eastern Tibet, and just returned. I was still the wild teenager and had been
stuck with the distasteful job of nyerpa for Gyalrong House--this means I was
a kind of quartermaster and had to make sure there was enough firewood and
food to keep the house kitchen going for several hundred monks. Since the
Rinpoche was a member of Gyalrong, we were supposed to send a committee
over to the hermitage to welcome him back and present him gifts. As nyerpa
I was expected to arrange some supplies and help carry them along.
In private conversation Pabongka Rinpoche was in the habit of constantly
attaching "Quite right! Quite right!" to everything he said. So I distinctly
remember when I came into his presence, and he put his hand on my head,
and he said "Quite right! Quite right! Now this one looks like a bright boy!"
From that day on I felt as though I had received his blessing, and some special
power to pursue my studies.

In my eighteenth year, the Rinpoche was requested to come across to our own
Sera Mey College and deliver a discourse on the Steps of the path to
Buddhahood. He would receive countless requests of this sort, usually from
wealthy patrons who hoped to collect some merit for the future life, or from
monks who wanted to receive the transmission of a particular teaching so they
could pass it on to their own followers in the future. The Rinpoche would
usually promise to consider the request, and then try to satisfy several at one
time by delivering a large public discourse.
These discourses would be announced months in a advance. The sponsors
would rent a huge assembly hall in one of the major monasteries just outside
the capital, or reserve one of the great chapels in Lhasa itself. We monks had
our regular classes to attend but could sometimes arrange to make the hour's
walk to Lhasa (no cars in Tibet those days), attend the teaching, and walk back
quickly before the evening debate sessions at the monastery park. I remember
the elderly monks would start out before us and return later, or even get
permission to take a room in Lhasa for the duration of the course, since the
walk was difficult for them.
This particular discourse at Sera Mey went on for a full three months. We sat
for six hours a day: three hours in the morning, with a break for lunch, and
then three hours in the afternoon. Pabongka Rinpoche went carefully through
the entire Lam Rim Chenmo, the great exposition of the entire Steps on the path
to Buddhahood written by the incomparable Lord Tsongkapa--who is also the
author of the root verses explained by Pabongka Rinpoche in his commentary
here. The Rinpoche referred to all eight of the classic texts on the Steps of the
path during his discourse, which was attended by about 10,000 monks.
Like so many others in the audience, I was stunned by the power of his
teaching. Most of it I had heard before, but the way in which he taught it and,
I felt, the blessing I had received from him made it suddenly strike home for
me. Here I was, living the short precious life of a human, and fortunate
enough to be a student at one of the greatest Buddhist monasteries in the
world. Why was I wasting my time? What would happen if I suddenly died?
In my heart I made a decision to master the teachings, for the benefit of myself
and others. I remember going to my room, to my house teacher Geshe
Namdrol, and declaring my change of heart to him: "Now the bad boy is going
to study, and become a master geshe!" Geshe Namdrol laughed, and told me,
"The day you become a geshe is the day I become the Ganden Tripa!"
Now the Ganden Tripa is one of the highest religious personages in Tibet: he
holds the throne of Lord Tsongkapa himself, and wins the position by attaining
the highest rank of geshe--the hlarampa--and then serving as the head of one

of the two colleges devoted to the study of the secret teachings. My house
teacher had never gone above the tsokrampa rank of geshe, so could never have
become the Ganden Tripa anyway, and we both knew it. I got angry, in a
good way, and swore to him that I would not only become a geshe but a
hlarampa geshe as well. In my later years, after I had passed the hlarampa
examinations with highest honors, Geshe Namdrol used to come a little
sheepishly and ask in a roundabout way if I could help him pick a good topic
for the day's debates.
This was the great gift I received from Pabongka Rinpoche: I attacked my
studies with a passion, keeping my mind on the shortness of life and the value
of helping others. Up to this time I had been the house scribe, sort of a clerk
who wrote everyone's letters home. To save time for my studies I took my
costly pens and paper one day and, in front of my hundreds of house-mates,
gave them away to anyone who would take them.
Then things got serious with the government's plan to send Geshe Namdrol
and me to the monastic post in south Tibet. The tenure of the position would
be six years, and I calculated my potential loss: one remaining year in the
"special topics" class for the perfection of wisdom, two years in the class on the
"middle way" or correct view, and the final two years in the classes on
transcendent knowledge and vowed morality--all extremely important
Buddhist topics. It took some courage, but I went to my teacher and begged
his permission to stay and continue my studies at Sera Mey.
To everyone's amazement he agreed, and chose my happy- go-lucky roommate
to accompany him instead. He turned over to me the keys to his apartments
and left, much to the dismay of all our neighbors, who were convinced I
would destroy the entire place. Soon though they were calling me "Gyalrong
Chunze"--something like the "bookworm from Gyalrong House"--and my
studies had improved enough that I was able to obtain a miksel, or special
release from all other duties so I could devote every minute to my course
work.
I can say it was here that my life turned around, for three reasons: Pabongka
Rinpoche had put some renunciation and other good motivation in my heart;
I had given up wealth and position to pursue spiritual studies; and I had
gained the free time to devote myself to practice. In this last category of
leisure I would include the fact that I finally got out from under the influence
of my prankster roommate, and also had the good fortune to meet the
Venerable Jampel Senge.
As monastic custom goes, Jampel Senge's class (which was a year ahead of
mine) had been joined with my own at a certain point in the curriculum. Like

some of the famous figures mentioned in the teaching you are about to read,
he was originally brought up in a different religion and came to our monastery
rather late in his life, a confirmed skeptic. He stayed though and became a real
master of Buddhism; every day we would spend hours together, reviewing
what we had heard in class and preparing each other for the evening debates.
It was from Jampel Senge that I learned the value of good spiritual friends; in
the end, we reached the highest ranks of the geshe together. After our country
was lost he travelled to Italy, where he became the tutor of the famed
Tibetologist professor Tucci, and finally passed away there.
It was well before my final exams that the precious Pabongka Rinpoche himself
passed from this earth. After the teachings I attended at Sera Mey, the
Rinpoche had travelled to the Hloka district in south Tibet, to teach his many
disciples there. He continued on to the province of Dakpo, teaching
continuously, and passed away there at the age of sixty-three, in 1941. It is a
custom in our country to cremate the body of a holy person and preserve the
ashes in a small shrine, and I still remember the day when they brought the
Rinpoche's remains back to his mountain hermitage, Tashi Chuling. A shrine
was constructed and a great many monks including myself came to pay our
respects, and make our final offerings.
We Buddhists believe that although the body dies, the mind--since it is not
destructible like physical matter--continues on and eventually comes into a
new body, within your mother's womb if you are to be born as a human. We
believe that great saints can select their birth, and that out of compassion they
will choose to return and teach their disciples again if this will benefit them.
Thus it is a custom for the disciples to seek the help of some great wise men
and go out to find the child who is the reincarnation of their teacher.
Pabongka Rinpoche's first reincarnation was born in the Drikung area of
central Tibet, during the troubled years when the Chinese first invaded and
began to take over our country. He escaped along with many of our people
over the Himalaya mountains, and came down into the Indian plain. Here
most of the monks who survived the perilous journey were placed by the
Indian government in a makeshift refugee camp set up in the abandoned
prison at Buxall, in the jungles of Bengal state, west India. (I myself was
nearly killed during the bombardment of our monastery, and upon reaching
India was chosen by His Holiness the Dalai Lama to work in the newly-
formed education office of the exile government at Dharamsala, near the
border of north India.)
Buxall Prison had been built many years before by the British during their rule
of India. It was a massive structure of concrete and huge iron doors built
purposely in the middle of nowhere. Mahatma Gandhi and Mr. Nehru, the

leaders of India's movement for independence, had been among the
distinguished inmates.
India is a poor country but did her best to help us refugees; the prison was the
only immediate housing they could find in their overpopulated land. The
jungle weather was hot, steamy and humid--the complete opposite of our
homeland. Like the delegations of translators who had come to India over a
thousand years before to bring us back an alphabet, the majority of our monks
came down with tuberculosis and other tropical diseases. A great many died.
Buxall Prison did have one advantage though--total solitude. And for the first
time in history, great scholars from all the many traditions and monasteries of
Tibet were thrown together in one place, for over a decade. In this
environment the second Pabongka Rinpoche excelled in his studies, and before
long was himself teaching the other monks such subjects as grammar and
composition. He stood for his geshe examination at an early age, and
distinguished himself. During these examinations he seemed weak and in
some pain, and immediately after their completion was hospitalized with a
serious case of tuberculosis. To the dismay of all the monks he suddenly died;
his close followers could not believe that he would chose to leave them at such
a desperate hour in our history--we were thrown into depression, and one
great geshe even tried to kill himself (although we do believe that this is a sin).
The second reincarnation of Pabongka Rinpoche was discovered in Darjeeling,
India, by his disciple Kyabje Trijang Rinpoche and is now a promising young
monk at the new Sera Monastery, which was founded in south India by a
dedicated band of refugee monks who survived the ordeal at Buxall. He lives
in comfortable quarters that were constructed by his followers, some of whom
also attended him in his two previous lives. His principal tutor was the late
Giku-la, Lobsang Samten, who also served as a leader of the new Gyalrong
House and director of the Sera Mey Scholarship Fund, which I and my own
students have established for the continued training of young monks in our
traditional course of study.
The original Pabongka Rinpoche also survives in the labors of his principal
disciples, and in his numerous writings. His collected works comprise some
fifteen volumes with a total of about a hundred different treatises covering a
wide range of topics from both the open and the secret teachings of the
Buddha. His students played a special role in preserving his teachings, as
many of the major works that we have today are actually records of his oral
discourses compiled by his closest followers. The commentary on the Three
Principal Paths here, for example, was prepared from a collection of lecture
notes by the Venerable Lobsang Dorje. The Rinpoche's great work on the Steps
of the path to Buddhahood, entitled Liberation in Our Hands, was compiled by

Kyabje Trijang Rinpoche, Lobsang Yeshe Tenzin Gyatso, who served as one of
the two tutors of the present Dalai Lama and was my own precious root lama.
Kyabje Trijang Rinpoche has left us with a detailed biography of Pabongka
Rinpoche, in two volumes, along with some nine lengthy volumes of his own
masterly composition. It is at Trijang Rinpoche's direction too that I have
undertaken an English translation of Liberation in Our Hands, and the first
volume will be published this year.
Over many centuries, Tibet has produced an extraordinary number of Buddhist
saints and scholars; therefore it is rare for a lama's teachings to become classics
within his own lifetime, as did the works of Pabongka Rinpoche. Certainly
another exception to this rule was the matchless Je Tsongkapa, the author of
the original verses of the Three Principal Paths in the present volume.
Lord Tsongkapa's full name is Gyalwa Je Tsongkapa Chenpo Lobsang Drakpa,
and he holds a unique position in our Tibetan Buddhist tradition. All in one
he was the greatest philosopher, and most eloquent writer, and most successful
organizer of Buddhism who ever lived in our land; as time continues to pass
after the forced opening of our country's doors, I feel sure he will come to be
recognized throughout the world as one of the greatest thinkers in history.
He was born in 1357 in the Amdo area of northeast Tibet, in a district called
Tsongka (hence his name, which means "the one from Tsongka"). He was
granted his first, basic vows at a tender age from one Chuje Karmapa Rolpay
Dorje, and received the name Kunga Nyingpo. By the age of eight he had
taken his vows as a Buddhist novice, and already received initiations into the
secret teachings of Buddhism. He excelled in his studies and on the advice of
his teachers journeyed to central Tibet in his sixteenth year, to seek further
instruction from the many sages there.
It would be impossible to relate here all of what Je Tsongkapa then studied.
Briefly put, he mastered the entire open and secret teachings of Buddhism, as
well as the various classical sciences. A few examples of the subjects he
covered with different teachers are: the secret teachings of Naro and the Great
Seal from Chen-nga Chukyi Gyalpo; the ancient medical traditions from Je
Konchok Kyab; the perfection of wisdom from masters at Dewa Chen
Monastery, the great Sakya teacher Rendawa, and Nyawon Kunga Pel; the
Steps of the path and other Seer precepts from Hle Rinpoche; classical logic
from Lochen Dunsang, Venerable Rendawa, and Dorje Rinchen; the treasure
of knowledge from Lochen Dunsang and Venerable Rendawa; the middle way
from Venerable Rendawa and Kenchen Chukyab Sangpo; older sutras from
Kenchen Losel; vowed morality from Venerable Rendawa and Master Chukyab
Sangpo; the secret teachings of the wheel of time from Yeshe Gyeltsen and
others; those on the secret collection from Venerable Rendawa, as well as from

Hle Rinpoche and others, according to the system of their own teacher, Buton
Rinpoche; the "blue book" of the Seer masters, the deeds of bodhisattvas, and
early mental training texts from Kenchen Chukyab Sangpo; and the list goes
on and on.
This does not include all the teachings that Lord Tsongkapa is said to have
received directly from enlightened beings through dreams, visions, and direct
contact; we read for example that for many years he was tutored by the divine
being Gentle Voice. At first one of his principal teachers, Lama Umapa, acted
as sort of a translator; later on, Lord Tsongkapa was able to meet and learn
from this being on his own.
We should say a word here about these "divine beings." We Buddhists believe
that there are many Buddhas in the universe, and that they can each appear
on one or more planets at the same time, if this will help the beings who live
there. We believe that a Buddha is the ultimate evolution of all life; that he
can know all things, but does not have all power: he did not create the
universe, for example (this we have done by the force of our own past deeds,
good and bad), nor can he take all our sufferings away from us by
himself--these too we believe come from our own past actions, and must be
stopped by ourselves.
We do believe that by studying and practicing the teaching of the Buddha we
ourselves can become Buddhas, as can every living being. Therefore when we
speak of enlightened beings appearing to a saint directly and so on we do not
mean that Buddhists believe in a great many gods or the like, but rather that
any being who has removed all his suffering and gained all knowledge can
appear to any one of us, in any form that may help us to reach this ultimate
state ourselves.
Only after he had received a great many teachings did Lord Tsongkapa take
his full ordination as a monk; this was in Yarlung, south of Lhasa, when he
was twenty-five. The ordination name he had already been granted, upon
becoming a novice, was Lobsang Drakpa--and it is in Lord Tsongkapa's
memory that so many Tibetans are given "Lobsang" as their personal name.
By now his transition from student to teacher was accelerating quickly, and in
fact he later tutored a number of his own greatest teachers. We can
understand his life from this point on more clearly if we look at the influence
his teaching still has on Buddhism today, rather than simply retracing his
career up to the final moment at Ganden Monastery in 1419, when he passed
away at the age of sixty-two.

Buddhism is counted among the handful of great religions in the modern
world, but it is actually close to extinction. In some countries it has
disappeared, only recently, through violent political upheavals. In other
countries it remains, but typically not in its whole form: the Buddha taught the
so-called "greater" and "lesser" ways, contained in four great schools of
thought, and all four of these are now studied and practiced actively only in
the Tibetan tradition. This tradition itself survives mainly in our monastic
universities; among these, the three great institutions of Ganden, Drepung, and
Sera are the mainstays. We can learn much of the adult years of Lord
Tsongkapa by searching for his influence upon these last great bastions of the
total Buddhist path.
And in fact we see his hand here everywhere. A young monk at Sera
Monastery, for example, begins his formal education with the study of logic,
and as his textbook is likely to use either the Path to Freedom or the Jewel of
Reasoning. Both were written by direct disciples of Lord Tsongkapa: the former
by Gyaltsab Je (1362-1432), and the latter by Gyalwa Gendun Drup (1391-1475).
For his next course, twelve years on what we call the "perfection of wisdom,"
our monk will be using the Golden Rosary, a commentary composed by the
Master at Kyishu and Dewa Chen, following his final ordination. The monk
will refer as well to the immense Essential Jewel, another work by Gyaltsab Je.
When he reaches the "special topics" part of the course, he may well commit
to memory the entire 230 pages of Lord Tsongkapa's Essence of Eloquence, on
certain tenets of the great Buddhist schools.
Between courses the young monk will often have opportunities to attend
discourses delivered by visiting lamas; perhaps by the Dalai Lama himself.
The present is the fourteenth of his line and, as we might expect, the first was
another of Lord Tsongkapa's direct disciples. Popular subjects for these public
discourses are the Greater Steps on the Path (by Lord Tsongkapa), The
Bodhisattva's Life (Gyaltsab Je's Door for Bodhisattvas is likely to be the
commentary used), or the Three Principal Paths (our present text, again by Lord
Tsongkapa).
The monk student's next course will be the very difficult "middle way"
philosophy of the highest school of Buddhism. He will be using Lord
Tsongkapa's Great Commentary for understanding the early Indian
commentaries. If he goes deeper, the monk might read Eye-Opener, the great
exposition on emptiness by Kedrup Je (1385-1438), again a direct disciple of
Lord Tsongkapa.
Everywhere the young scholar goes he is surrounded by the Master's influence.
The very monastery in which he walks has been founded either by Lord

Tsongkapa or one of his direct disciples: Ganden in 1409 by the Lord himself,
Drepung in 1416 by Jamyang Chuje Tashi Pelden, and Sera in 1419 by Jamchen
Chuje Shakya Yeshe. The very robes that the monk wears were in part
designed by Lord Tsongkapa. When he sits down in his room to meditate, he
is likely to start off with a mental picture of the Master, as taught in a popular
Lama Practice manual. When he fingers his beads, he may well be counting
miktsema's, the Tibetan equivalent of Hail Mary's, in supplication to Lord
Tsongkapa.
And the monk will eventually take his geshe examinations at the great Monlam
Festival, a national three-week holiday devoted to spiritual activities and
instituted by Lord Tsongkapa in 1408. If he is Mongolian, he will probably
count his birthday from the great Festival of Lights on the 25th of the tenth
Asian month: a day devoted to the memory of Lord Tsongkapa.
If he gets that far, our monk's next course covers what we call the "treasure of
knowledge." His basic commentary will be that of the first Dalai Lama, Lord
Tsongkapa's student. By now the monk is a master logician, and can use the
Gyalwang Treasure, a dialectic exposition written by Gyalwang Trinley Namgyal
about a hundred years ago. This author is famous too for writing the Great
Biography--of Lord Tsongkapa.
Throughout his course work, the student attends daily debate sessions; he goes
to an open park at the monastery and must defend his understanding of the
day's lesson, quoting the texts from memory since no books may be brought
along. Here he is again following the example of the monk from Tsongka,
who travelled to central Tibet as a teenager and distinguished himself in a
great many public debates at the monasteries of Dewa Chen, Sakya, Sangden,
Gakrong, Damring, Eh, Nenying, and others.
If he passes his geshe examination with honors, the monk will be eligible to
attend one of the two tantric colleges, where he will learn the secret teachings
of Buddhism. One of his principal textbooks will be the Greater Steps on the
Secret Path, by Lord Tsongkapa himself. He may too use one of the many
detailed treatises of Kedrup Je, another of the Master's illustrious students.
The collected writings of Lord Tsongkapa and his two major disciples are
usually printed together under the title "Collected Works of the Father and his
Sons." They run no less than thirty-eight large volumes containing some 300
different treatises on every subject of Buddhist philosophy. Lord Tsongkapa's
composition is marked by extensive references to the early classics of
Buddhism, a strict use of the rules of logic and precise definitions, a massive
vocabulary of Tibetan which will probably never be equalled, a flawless
observance of the rules of classical grammar, and a sensitivity to the needs of
students of every level--from beginning to advanced.

This last point is why the present work, the Three Principal Paths, has been so
popular in Tibet over the centuries. As the commentary here describes, Lord
Tsongkapa has managed to pack the entire teachings of Buddhism into a mere
fourteen verses. We believe that, if the work is studied with a pure heart and
the right effort, it can actually lead one to enlightenment.
As its closing lines reveal, the text of the Three Principal Paths was written by
Lord Tsongkapa for a student of his by the name of Ngawang Drakpa, whom
we also know as Tsako Wonpo--the "friar from Tsako district." Ngawang
Drakpa was not one of Lord Tsongkapa's most famous students, although a
wonderful drawing of him does appear in the group of close disciples
clustered around the Master in the central painting of the Tsongka Gyechu, a
traditional rendering of the life of Lord Tsongkapa in a standard set of fifteen
scroll-paintings.2
Surprisingly, one of the best sources we have for information about Ngawang
Drakpa is the biography of Pabongka Rinpoche, the author of our commentary
here. In the first volume of the work we come across a captivating exchange
between the Rinpoche and his mother, who has shown up at Sera Monastery
and is dismayed by the austerity of his life there. She wonders out loud how
things might have been if the world had recognized the boy for what he
was--the reincarnation of the great Changkya, who had served as personal
spiritual advisor to the Emperor of China some 200 years before, and whose
luxurious quarters still waited near the palace in Peking, for the next
incarnation. But Pabongka Rinpoche says to her,
I don't see how I can say that I've ever shown even the slightest
trace of the good qualities that Changkya Rolpay Dorje used to
have: his knowledge and his spiritual attainments. I will admit
though that I feel tremendous faith and admiration for this great
man, and when I read his works, they are definitely easier for me
to grasp than other scriptures. It is true too that ever since I was
young I have had some strong attraction to the kind of Chinese
sedan chair in which Changkya used to ride, and a tremendous
predilection for all things Chinese.
This and the fact that you, mother, used to talk so much about
how I was recognized as him have led me to wonder if I might
not really be Changkya--and I begin sometimes to identify
myself with him.
On occasion too the thought comes to my mind that I have been
other people as well, in other times . . . during the days when
our great and gentle protector Tsongkapa lived on this earth I

was, I sometimes think, that friar from Tsako--Ngawang
Drakpa.3
Because of this revelation, the author of Pabongka Rinpoche's biography relates
something of the life of Ngawang Drakpa. We see one scene in the paintings
of Lord Tsongkapa's life where he is teaching a group of four monks at a
temple named Keru, and in the description of the great Jamyang Shepa (1648-
1721) we read that the Master is imparting lessons on the topics of the
perfection of wisdom, logic, and the middle way to Ngawang Drakpa and his
classmates.4
This seems to be just after Lord Tsongkapa's ordination, and well
before the first contact with his three more famous disciples: Gyaltsab Je,
Kedrup Je, and the first Dalai Lama.
Pabongka Rinpoche's biographer concurs and quotes a Secret Biography to the
effect that Ngawang Drakpa belonged to a group of the Master's pupils named
the "Original Four," previous to his period of seclusion. Ngawang Drakpa is
here said to have been born into the line of the kings of Tsako, to the far east
of Tibet in Gyalmo Rong. This is another name for Gyalrong, which is also the
very house at Sera Mey College where the child Pabongka was placed, on the
sage's advice.
We read that Ngawang Drakpa, like Lord Tsongkapa himself, travelled to
central Tibet in search of further instruction. He became adept in both the
open and secret teachings, met and learned from the Master, and accompanied
him on a journey to the Tsel monastery in Kyishu, a district in east Tibet.
After their return to Lhasa, the capital, he undertook various spiritual practices.
One well-known story about Ngawang Drakpa says that around this time he
and his teacher agreed to take special notice of their dreams during the coming
night. Ngawang Drakpa dreamt that he gazed to the sky and saw two great
white conch-shells, the kind we hollow out in Tibet and use as horns in our
religious ceremonies. The shells descended into the lap of his robes, and
suddenly merged into one.
Ngawang Drakpa saw himself taking up the conch-horn and blowing it--the
sound that came out was deafening, and spread to an inconceivable distance.
Lord Tsongkapa interpreted the dream for his student, saying that it foretold
how Ngawang Drakpa himself would spread the Buddha's teachings in his
faraway home of Gyalrong. This in fact he did, and is credited with founding
over a hundred monasteries in eastern Tibet.
Pabongka Rinpoche's biography also speaks of the close relationship between
this particular disciple and Lord Tsongkapa. In the final lines of the Three
Principal Paths, the Master calls him "my son," showing a personal affection not

very typical of the great scholar. He also seemed especially willing to satisfy
Ngawang Drakpa's petitions for teachings (in the scene at Keru Temple we see
some of the monks in a pleading gesture before the Master), and it is said that
he composed his account of the famous bodhisattva Ever-Weeping at Ngawang
Drakpa's personal request.5
As final evidence of their deep bond, our biographer quotes from a letter that
Lord Tsongkapa sent his student. From the context (the entire message is still
extant), we know that Ngawang Drakpa has already taken the long journey
back to Gyalrong, and is making tremendous efforts to teach the people there.
In these few beautiful lines,6
the Master implores his disciple to follow his
private instructions. He urges him to act and pray, in all his lives, as his
teacher does. And he invites Ngawang Drakpa to meet him again, at the end,
in enlightenment--where he promises to offer his favored student the first sip
of their cup of immortality.
************
The ending of our own story is not as happy; we are refugees from Tibet,
driven out of our Shangrila by the Chinese armies. The halls of Gyalrong
house, where Pabongka Rinpoche gained his knowledge and I played my tricks
on Yeshe Lobsang, have been bombed out and burned. The Rinpoche's
mountain hermitage, Tashi Chuling, stands like some strange skeleton--only
the front wall of stone remains erect, for all the rest was ripped down by the
Chinese for firewood. The monk's cell at the mouth of his wonder meditation
cave, Takden, was smashed to rubble, which so fills the opening that no one
can even find it now.
As Buddhists, we Tibetans do not feel anger at the Chinese, only a deep
sadness at the loss of our country and traditions, and the deaths of over a
million of our friends and relatives. In a way we have become more aware of
how precious and short life is, and how we should practice religion while we
are still alive to do so. Our loss too is perhaps the greater world's gain, as
teachings like the one you are about to read now reach the outer world for the
first time. I pray that this little book will help us all, to defeat our real
enemies--the desire and anger and ignorance within our own minds.
Sermey Geshe Lobsang Tharchin May 31, 1988
Baksha (Abbot) 15th day of the 4th
Rashi Gempil Ling Buddhist month,
First Kalmuk Buddhist Temple Sagan Dawa,
Freewood Acres, Howell the day of the
New Jersey, USA Buddha's Enlightenment

ABOUT THE AUTHORS
TSONGKAPA (1357-1419), also known as Je Rinpoche Lobsang Drakpa, is the
single greatest commentator in the 2,500 year history of Buddhism. He was
born in the district of Tsongka in eastern Tibet and took his first vows at a
tender age. As a teenager he had already mastered much of the teachings of
Buddhism and was sent by his tutors to the great monastic universities of
central Tibet. Here he studied under the leading Buddhist scholars of his day;
it is said as well that he enjoyed mystic visions in which he met and learned
from different forms of the Buddha himself.
The 18 volumes of Tsongkapa's collected works contain eloquent and incisive
commentaries on virtually every major classic of ancient Buddhism, as well as
his famed treatises on the "Steps of the Path to Buddhahood." His students,
who included the first Dalai Lama of Tibet, contributed hundreds of their own
expositions of Buddhist philosophy and practice.
Tsongkapa founded the Great Three monasteries of Tibet, where by custom
nearly 25,000 monks have studied the scriptures of Buddhism over the
centuries. He also instituted the great Monlam festival, a period of religious
study and celebration for the entire Tibetan nation. Tsongkapa passed away
in his 62nd year, at his home monastery of Ganden in Lhasa, the capital of
Tibet.
PABONGKA RINPOCHE (1878-1941), also known as Jampa Tenzin Trinley
Gyatso, was born into a leading family in the state of Tsang in north-central
Tibet. As a boy he entered the Gyalrong House of Sera Mey, one of the
colleges of the great Sera Monastic University, and attained the rank of geshe,
or master of Buddhist philosophy. His powerful public teachings soon made
him the leading spiritual figure of his day, and his collected works on every
facet of Buddhist thought and practice comprise some 15 volumes. His most
famous student was Kyabje Trijang Rinpoche (1901-1981), the junior tutor of
the present Dalai Lama. Pabongka Rinpoche passed away at the age of 63 in
the Hloka district of south Tibet.
GESHE LOBSANG THARCHIN (1921- ) was born in Lhasa, and as a boy
also entered the Gyalrong House of Sera Mey. He studied under both
Pabongka Rinpoche and Kyabje Trijang Rinpoche, and after a rigorous 25-year
course in the Buddhist classics was awarded the highest rank of the geshe
degree. He graduated from the Gyumey Tantric College of Lhasa in 1958 with
the position of administrator. Since 1959 he has taught Buddhist philosophy

at various institutions in Asia and the United States, and in 1975 completed
studies in English at Georgetown University. For 15 years he has served as the
abbot of Rashi Gempil Ling, a Kalmuk Mongolian temple in New Jersey. He
is the founder of the Mahayana Sutra and Tantra Centers of New Jersey and
Washington D.C., and author of numerous translations of major Buddhist texts.
In 1977 he directed the development of the first computerized Tibetan word
processor, and has played a leading role in the re-establishment of Sera Mey
Monastic College, of which he is a lifetime director.
GESHE MICHAEL ROACH (1952- ) graduated with honors from Princeton
University and received the Presidential Scholar medallion from Richard Nixon
at the White House in 1970. He studied at the library of the Government of
Tibet under the auspices of the Woodrow Wilson School of International
Affairs, and then for over twenty years under Geshe Tharchin at Rashi Gempil
Ling, with additional course work at Sera Monastery. He was ordained a
Buddhist monk in 1983 and received the degree of Geshe in 1996 from Sera
Mey Monastic College in South India. He served as a director of a large
Manhattan diamond firm, and has been active in the restoration of Sera Mey
Monastery. Geshe Michael founded the Asian Classics Institute, the Asian
Classics Input Project, Diamond Abbey, The Three Jewels Outreach Center,
Godstow Retreat Center, and Diamond Mountain Retreat Center. Geshe
Michael is in isolated three year retreat until 2003.

Notes to Reading One
1. illustrious scholar Changkya Rolpay Dorje: An excellent introduction to the
history of the Changkya line has been written by E. Gene Smith and is
included in his foreword to the collected works of the Tibetan sage Tuken
Dharma Vajra (see pp. 1-7, vol. 1, bibliography entry 52).
2. fifteen scroll-paintings: There are at least four sets of the paintings outside of
Tibet; they are very much alike because the "paintings" are actually
block-prints. In my student days these prints were available at Narthang
Monastery near the town of Shigatse to the southwest of Lhasa--one would hire
a painter to fill in the colors and write the traditional inscriptions explaining
each scene.
3. I don't see how... See pp. 221-2 of Vol. I of the Rinpoche's biography,
bibliography entry 55.
4. Ngawang Drakpa and his classmates: See p. 293, bibliography entry 27.
5. famous bodhisattva Ever-Weeping: The text is still extant; see bibliography entry
64.
6. these few beautiful lines: The lines quoted by Pabongka Rinpoche's biographer
appear on p. 584 (bibliography entry 69). Immediately following this letter in
Lord Tsongkapa's collected works are preserved two more sent to Ngawang
Drakpa; the first of these contains the Three Principal Paths.

28
The Asian Classics Institute
Course I: The Principal Teachings of Buddhism
Reading Two

*, , RDO RJE 'CHANG PHA BONG KHA PA DPAL BZANG POS LAM GTZO'I ZAB BZHI PA 
LTA BA'I DPYAD PA RDZOGS PA'I TSAD NI, KHRID STZAL SKABS KYI GSUNG BSHAD ZIN BRIS 
LAM BZANG SGO 'BYED CES BYA BA BZHUGS SO, ,
Herein kept is the "Key that Unlocks the Door
to the Noble Path,"7
a record that was made
when teachings on the Three Principal Paths
were imparted by the glorious Pabongka Rinpoche,
the Holder of the Diamond.8

**, , NA MO GU RU MANYDZU 
GOH sh'A YA,
"Namo guru Manjugoshaya"--
I bow to the Master of Wisdom, whose name is Gentle Voice.

,RGYAL KUN GSANG GSUM GCIG BSDUS NGUR SMRIG GAR,
,MTSUNGS MED DRIN CAN BLA MA LA BTUD DE,
,'JAM DBYANGS ZHAL LUNG LAM GTZO RNAM GSUM GYI,
,ZIN THO NYUNG NGUR BRI LA 'DIR BRTZON BYA,
I bow first to my teacher, who out of unmatched
kindness masquerades
In the saffron robe,9
though in truth he's the
secret three of every Victor.10
Next I pledge I'll try to write here some
brief notes in explanation
Of the verses taught by Gentle Voice11
himself: "Three Principal Paths."12
THE PRELIMINARIES
I. The Lama and the Word

,DE LA, RAB 'BYAMS RGYAL BA MA LUS PA'I MKHYEN BRTZE NUS GSUM GCIG TU BSDUS PA'I RANG GZUGS, BDAG CAG MCHOG DMAN BAR MA'I 'GRO BA YONGS KYI MA 'DRIS PA'I MDZA' BSHES GCIG PU, SNYIGS DUS KYI 'KHOR LO'I MGON GCIG RJE BTZUN BLA MA KHYAB BDAG PHA BONG KHA'I RDO RJE 'CHANG CHEN PO BKA' DRIN MTSUNGS ZLA MED PA MCHOG GI ZHAL SNGA NAS,
Now there was a lama, who was the very image of all the knowledge, love,
and power of every single one of the absolute myriad of Buddhas. All in one
person. Even for those who had never met him he was the single greatest
friend that any of them, high or humble, could ever hope to have. He stood
at the center of our universe, the holy Lama, one and only protector of all
around him in these degenerate days. He was the great Holder of the
Diamond, Pabongka Rinpoche, whose kindness knew no match. And from his
holiest lips he spoke a teaching.

DUS GSUM SANGS RGYAS THAMS CAD KYI BSTAN PA'I SNYING PO BYANG CHUB LAM GYI RIM PA'I YANG SNYING , 'JAM DBYANGS BLA MA'I LEGS GSUNG GI BDUD RTZI LAM GYI GTZO BO RNAM GSUM GYI ZAB KHRID RTZA TSIG GI STENG NAS ZAB CING GNAD 'DRIL BA DGYES PA CHEN POS 
SNGA PHYIR STZAL BA RNAMS BRJED PAR PHANGS TE DRAN THO GANG ZIN THOR BU 'GA' ZHIG PHYOGS GCIG TU DGOD PA LA,
He spoke of the very heart of the "Steps to Buddhahood," a teaching which is
itself the heart of all that is taught by each and every Buddha, of the past or
present or future. He spoke of the Three Principal Paths, the nectar essence of
all the wonderful words ever uttered by the Master, Gentle Voice, has ever
uttered.
Over the years, Pabongka Rinpoche imparted this profound instruction to us
a number of times. He followed the original verses closely and savored the
teaching well, wrapping within it every deep and vital point. Fearing we
would forget some part we took down notes, and have gathered a number of
them together from various sources, to make a single work.
II. Why Learn the Three Principal Paths?

'O LAGS SO, DE YANG NI JI SKAD DU, KHAMS GSUM CHOS KYI RGYAL PO TZONG KHA PA CHEN PO'I GSUNG LAS, DAL BA'I RTEN 'DI YID BZHIN NOR LAS LHAG, CES SOGS LAS BRTZAMS PA'I SNGON 'GRO'I GSUNG BSHAD LAM YONGS RDZOGS DANG 'BREL BAR   
Pabongka Rinpoche opened his teaching with introductory remarks that started
off from a number of lines by the great Tsongkapa, King of the Dharma13
in all
three realms.14
The first one read, "More than a wishing jewel, this life of
opportunity."15
By using these lines, the Rinpoche was able to tie his opening
remarks to the entire path from beginning to end, summarizing a number of
important points in brief.

   KUN SLONG BCOS TSUL RGYUD 'KHUL NGES DANG , LHAG PAR SNOD KYI SKYON GSUM SPONG , 'DU SHES DRUG BSTEN TE NYAN LUGS DANG , SNOD KYI SKYON DRI MA CAN THOG MAR GSUNGS PA 'DI CHOS NYAN PA TZAM DU MA ZAD BSAM SGOM GZHAN LA'ANG GAL CHE TSUL SOGS MDOR BSDUS RE STZAL TE,
These began with the need for us in the audience to truly try to change our
hearts, and listen to the teaching with the purest of motivations. We were to
avoid with special care the three famous "problems of the pot,"16
and to follow
the practice where you use six images for the instruction.17
Here Pabongka
Rinpoche detailed for us the various points; he said, for example, that he spoke
first about how we should avoid the problem of being like a dirty pot because
a good motivation was important not only for our classroom hours, but
essential too for the steps of contemplation and meditation that should follow
the initial period of instruction.

DUS GSUM GYI RGYAL BA THAMS CAD KYANG GANG NAS GSHEGS PA'I LAM PO CHE, SA GSUM GYI SGRON ME GCIG PU NI BYANG CHUB LAM GYI RIM PA NYID YIN CING , DE'I SNYING PO'AM SROG LTA BU NI LAM GYI GTZO BO RNAM GSUM YIN LA,
Now there is a great highway along which each and every Buddha of the three
times travels. It is the single guiding lamp for living beings in all three lands.18
It is none other than the teaching known as the "Steps to Buddhahood." And
the heart, the very life of this teaching, is the instruction on the three principal
paths.

DE YANG GZHAN DON DU 'TSANG RGYA BA LA SANGS RGYAS KYI GO 'PHANG DE BSGRUB DGOS, DE BSGRUB PA LA SGRUB TSUL SHES DGOS, DE LA CHOS THOS DGOS, THOS PA DE YANG LAM MA NOR BA ZHIG LA BYED DGOS PA YIN PAS   
We would all like to become Buddhas so we could help others; but to do so,
we have to work to achieve this state. To do this though we have to know
how. And to know how, we must study the dharma. The study that we do,
moreover, must center on a path that never errs.

DA LAM 'DIR 'JAM MGON TZONG KHA PA CHEN POS DRANG DON GDUL BYA'I SNANG NGOR SHAR PHYOGS RGYAL MO RONG DU TSA KHO DBON PO NGAG DBANG GRAGS PA LA GNANG BA'I LAM GYI GTZO BO RNAM GSUM GYI RTZA TSIG 'DI'I STENG NAS ZAB KHRID MDOR BSDUS TZAM 'BUL BA SKABS SU BAB PA YIN,
This brings us to our present text, the Three Principal Paths, which was
composed by the protector Gentle Voice as he appeared to his disciples in the
form of a man--the great Tsongkapa. He granted the teaching to Ngawang
Drakpa, a friar from Tsako district, out to the east in Gyamo Valley.19
We will
offer just a brief account of this profound work, following the words of each
verse.

LAM GTZO 'DIR LAM GYI GTZO BO RNAM GSUM DANG , LAM RIM LA SKYES BU GSUM ZHES MTSAN 'DOGS LUGS DANG SA BCAD KYI KHYAD PAR TZAM LAS DON LAM RIM DANG 'DRA YANG , SA BCAD PHYE TSUL GYIS KHRID RGYUN ZUR DU MDZAD PA RED,
Here we speak of the "three principal paths," while in the teaching on the steps
to Buddhahood we talk of practitioners of "three different scopes."20
Aside
from this distinction in the names we give them, and some differences in their
section divisions, the teachings on the three principal paths and those on the
steps to Buddhahood are essentially the same. A separate teaching tradition
has developed for the present text because of the different categories it
employs for the very same subject matter.

LAM GTZO GSUM NI MDO SNGAGS KYI CHOS GANG BYED KYANG LAM GYI SROG SHING LTA BU YIN PAS NGES PAR 'DI GSUM GYI RTZIS ZIN PA ZHIG DGOS, DE YANG NGES 'BYUNG GI RTZIS ZIN NA THAR PA'I RGYU DANG , BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS KYI RTZIS ZIN NA THAMS CAD MKHYEN PA'I RGYU DANG , YANG DAG PA'I LTA BA'I RTZIS ZIN NA 'KHOR BA'I GNYEN POR 'GRO BA YIN,
The three principal paths are like the main beam that supports all the rest of
the roof; your mind must be filled with these three thoughts if you hope to
practice any dharma at all, whether it be the open or the secret teachings of the
Buddha. A mind caught up in renunciation leads you to freedom, and a mind
filled with hopes of becoming a Buddha for the sake of every living being
brings you to the state of omniscience. A mind imbued with correct view,
finally, serves as the antidote for the cycle of life.

GZHAN DU NA BSOD NAMS MA YIN PA'I MI DGE BA'I LAS KYIS NGAN 'GRO DANG , BSOD NAMS KYI LAS KYIS 'DOD KHAMS KYI LHA MI, MI G-YO BA'I LAS KYIS GZUGS 
GZUGS MED KYI LHAR SKYE, LAM GTZO GSUM GYIS MA ZIN NA, RTZA RLUNG THIG LE, PHYAG CHEN, RDZOGS CHEN, BSKYED RDZOGS SOGS GA 'DRA ZHIG BSGOM LO BYAS KYANG DE THAMS CAD 'KHOR BA'I RGYU LAS, THAR PA DANG THAMS CAD MKHYEN PA'I RGYUR PHYOGS TZAM DU YANG MI 'GRO STE,
Otherwise you can do non-virtuous deeds, what we call "non-merit," and take
a birth in one of the lives of misery.21
Deeds of "merit" will only lead you to
birth as a man, or a pleasure-being of the desire realm. The deeds we call
"invariable" will take you as far as a pleasure being of the form or formless
realms. You can pretend to practice anything--the Channels and Winds and
Drops, the Great Seal, the Great Completion, the Creation and Completion,
whatever.22
But unless the three principal paths fill your thoughts, each of
these profound practices can only bring you back to the cycle of birth--they
can't even begin to lead you to freedom, or to the state of knowing all.

DGE BSHES PHU CHUNG BAS SPYAN SNGA BA LA, RIG PA'I GNAS LNGA LA MKHAS, TING NGE 'DZIN BRTAN PO THOB, MNGON SHES LNGA DANG LDAN, GRUB CHEN BRGYAD THOB PA GCIG DANG , JO BO'I MAN NGAG 'DI RGYUD LA JI LTA BA BZHIN MA SKYES KYANG , 'DI LA NGES SHES BRTAN PO GZHAN GYIS BLO BSGYUR DU MI BTUB PA GNYIS, KHYOD GANG LA 'DAM ZHES GSUNG BA LA,
We find it in the question that Geshe Puchungwa asked of Chen-ngawa:23
"Let's
say on the one hand that you could be one of those people who has mastered
all five sciences,24
who has gained the firmest of single-pointed concentration,
someone with each of the five types of clairvoyance,25
who's experienced all
eight of the great attainments.26
And let's say on the other hand that you could
be a person who had yet to gain any full realization of Lord Atisha's
teachings,27
but who nonetheless had developed such a firm recognition of their
truth that no one else could ever change your mind. Which of the two would
you choose to be?"

SPYAN SNGA BA'I ZHAL NAS, SLOB DPON, NGAS LAM GYI RIM PA RGYUD LA SKYES PA LTA 
ZHOG,LAM GYI RIM PA 'DI TZUG YIN SNYAM DU KHA PHYOGS TZAM DU GO BA YANG 'DI LA 'DAM STE,
And Chen-ngawa spoke in reply, "My master, leave alone any hope of realizing
all the steps to Buddhahood--I would rather even to be a person who had just
begun to get some glint of understanding, who could say to himself that he
had started off on the first of these steps to Buddhahood.

RIG PA'I GNAS LNGA LA MKHAS PA DANG , TING NGE 'DZIN LA BSKAL PA'I BAR DU MNYAM PAR BZHAG THUB PA DANG , MNGON PAR SHES PA LNGA DANG LDAN PA DANG , GRUB PA CHEN PO BRGYAD THOB PA DE RNAMS SNGON CHAD GRANGS MED PA ZHIG BYAS KYANG 'KHOR BA LAS MA 'DAS MA 'PHAGS, JO BO'I BYANG CHUB LAM RIM LA NGES PA RNYED NA NGES PAR 'KHOR BA LAS BZLOG STE MCHI ZHES GSUNGS PA DANG ,
"Why would this be my choice? In all my lives to now I've been a master of
the five sciences, countless times. And countless times I've gained single-
pointed concentration, even to where I could sit in meditation for an eon. The
same with the five types of clairvoyance--and the eight great attainments. But
never have I been able to go beyond the circle of life--never have I risen above
it. If I were able to gain a realization of the steps to Buddhahood that Atisha
taught, I would surely be able to turn from this round of births."

GZHAN YANG , BRAM ZE'I KHYE'U TZA NA KYA DANG , KYE RDO RJE'I RNAL 'BYOR PA SOGS KYI SNGON BYUNG LO RGYUS LTAR YIN, RJE BTZUN 'JAM PA'I DBYANGS KYIS 'JAM MGON TZONG KHA PA CHEN PO LA, 'KHOR BA'I NYES DMIGS DANG THAR PA'I PHAN YON MTHONG BA'I DRAN SHES NA RE BSTEN NAS SNANG SHAS LA BLO 'GROR MI STER BAR SRID PA'I MTSANG BCAR ZHING , THAR PA'I PHAN YON LA SEMS 'DZIN PA'I DMIGS RNAM GOMS NAS NGES 'BYUNG LA MYONG BA MA BTON PAR SBYIN PA,
The same point is conveyed by the stories of the Brahmin's son by the name
of Tsanakya,28
the master meditator of the practice called "Lo Diamond,"29
and
others as well. The lord Gentle Voice said it to our protector, the great
Tsongkapa:
Suppose you fail to devote some part of your practice to thinking
over the various problems of cyclic life, and the different benefits
of freedom from it. You don't sit down and meditate, keeping
your mind on trying to open your eyes to the ugliness of life, or
holding it on the wonders of freedom. You don't reach the point
where you never give a thought to the present life. You never
master the art of renunciation.

TSUL KHRIMS, BZOD PA, BRTZON 'GRUS, BSAM GTAN GYI DGE RTZA GANG GOMS KYANG THAR PA'I RGYUR GTAN NAS MI 'GRO BAS THAR 'DOD KYIS THOG MAR GDAMS NGAG GANG ZAB ZER BA GZHAN THAMS CAD BZHAG NAS NGES 'BYUNG LA RTOG BSGOM BYA DGOS,
And let's say you go out then and try to develop a skill in some
great virtuous practice--the perfection of giving, or that of
morality, or forbearance, effort, or staying in concentration.30
It
doesn't matter what. None of it can ever lead you on to the state
of freedom. People who really long for freedom then should
forget at first about all those other supposedly so deep advices.
They should use the "mental review" meditation to develop
renunciation.

THEG CHEN SGRUB PA POS RANG DON YID BYED KYI SKYON DANG , GZHAN DON GYI PHAN YON LA DRAN SHES THUN RE BSTEN NAS SEMS BSKYED LA MYONG BA 'DON PA'I DMIGS RNAM NAS GOMS PAR MA BYAS NA GZHAN GANG BYAS KYANG LAM DU MI 'GYUR TE,
People who are trying to practice the greater way should set
aside some regular periods of time for considering how harmful
it is to concentrate on your own welfare, and how much good
can come from concentrating on the welfare of others.
Eventually these thoughts can become habitual; nothing that you
ever do without them will ever turn to a path that leads you
anywhere.

GZHAN DU NA DGE RTZA RNAMS RANG DON YID BYED KYIS DBANG BYAS NAS DMAN PA'I BYANG CHUB KYI RGYU 'BA' ZHIG TU 'GYUR BA'I PHYIR TE, DPER NA NGES 'BYUNG LA DRAN SHES BSTEN PA'I DMIGS RNAM GOMS PAR MA BYAS NA DGE BA THAMS CAD SNANG SHAS KYIS DBANG BYAS NAS 'KHOR BA 'BA' ZHIG GI RGYU BYED PA BZHIN NO, ,
Virtues performed the other way are altered by the fact that you
are doing them for yourself--so all they can do in the end is
bring you to what is known as a "lower enlightenment." This is
similar to what happens when you are unable to practice the
various aspects of renunciation deeply because you have failed
to devote some time to thinking about it--every virtue you do is
affected by your concern for this present life, and only leads you
back to the cycle of birth.

DES NA SNGAGS LA SOGS PA'I GDAMS NGAG GANG ZAB ZER BA RNAMS BZHAG NAS THOG MAR NGES 'BYUNG DANG BYANG SEMS LA MYONG BA THON PA RE NGES PAR BYA DGOS,
It's a definite necessity then first to gain fluency in the attitudes
of renunciation and the desire to achieve Buddhahood for every
living being; so set aside for the time being all those supposedly
profound practices, the secret teachings and so on.

SKYES PA DANG DE NAS DGE BA THAMS CAD THAR PA DANG THAMS CAD MKHYEN PA'I RGYUR DBANG MED DU 'GRO BAS, DES NA 'DI LA SGOM RIN MI CHOG PAR BYED PA NI LAM GYI GNAD GTAN NAS MA SHES PA YIN GSUNGS,
Once you've managed to develop these attitudes, every single
virtuous act you perform leads you, despite yourself, to freedom
and the state where you know all things. Therefore it's a sign of
total ignorance about the very crux of the path when a person
doesn't consider these thoughts worth his meditation time.31

RTOG SGOM ZHES DPYAD SGOM BYED PA LA BYA, LAM GYI GTZO BO RNAM GSUM 'DI NI RGYAL BA'I GSUNG RAB THAMS CAD KYI SNYING PO'I BCUD PHYUNG BA STE, DE YANG GSUNG RAB DGONGS 'GREL DANG BCAS PA'I DON SKYES BU GSUM GYI LAM RIM DU 'DU, DE BYANG CHUB LAM GYI RIM PAR 'DU, DE LAM GTZO GSUM DU 'DUS PA YIN,
What we mean above by "mental review" meditation is the type of meditation
where you choose a particular line of thought and analyze it. Now the three
principal paths are the top of the cream skimmed from all the holy words that
the Buddhas have uttered. You see, the meanings of these words and the
commentaries upon them have all been packed into the teaching on the paths
for practitioners of three different scopes. And this teaching has all been
packed further, into the teaching on the steps to Buddhahood. This teaching,
in turn, has been packed into that of the three principal paths.

'O NA DE 'DU LUGS JI LTAR YIN SNYAM NA, GSUNG RAB DGONGS 'GREL DANG BCAS PA'I DON MTHA' DAG GDUL BYA RNAMS SANGS RGYAS THOB PA'I THABS 'BA' ZHIG TU GSUNGS SHING , DE THOB PAR BYED PA LA RGYU THABS SHES GNYIS LA BSLAB DGOS PAS, DE GNYIS KYI GTZO BO NI, BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS DANG YANG DAG PA'I LTA BA GNYIS YIN, DE GNYIS RGYUD LA SKYE BA LA THOG MAR RANG NYID 'KHOR BA'I PHUN TSOGS LA YANG ZHEN PA GTING NAS LOG STE   
How is each packed into the next? Every single thought expressed in the holy
words of the Buddhas, and in the commentaries which explain them, was
uttered for the sole purpose of helping disciples to attain the state of
Buddhahood. To achieve this state, one must verse himself in the two causes
that bring it about: we call them "method" and "wisdom." The main elements
of these two causes are also two: the desire to attain Buddhahood for the sake
of all living beings, and correct view. To develop these attitudes in the stream
of one's mind, a person must first gain an absolute disgust for all the apparent
good things of the life he himself is spending in the circle of births.

   RANG 'KHOR BA LAS THAR 'DOD KYI NGES 'BYUNG GI BSAM PA MTSAN NYID TSANG BA ZHIG MA SKYES NA, SEMS CAN GZHAN 'KHOR BA LAS SGROL 'DOD KYI SNYING RJE CHEN PO SKYE MI SRID PAS NGES 'BYUNG 'DI MED THABS MED,
Suppose you never manage to develop a desire to get free of the cycle of life
yourself--suppose you never reach a renunciation which is complete in every
respect. It will be impossible then for you to develop what we call "great
compassion"--the desire to liberate every other living being from the cycle.
This makes renunciation a "without which, nothing."

GZUGS SKU SGRUB BYED BSOD NAMS KYI TSOGS GSOG PA GTZO BO BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS DANG , CHOS SKU SGRUB BYED YE SHES KYI TSOGS KYI GNAD CHE SHOS NI YANG DAG PA'I LTA BA LA THUG PAS NA LAM GYI GNAD THAMS CAD LAM GTZO GSUM DU BSDUS NAS NYAMS SU LEN PA 'DI 'JAM DBYANGS KYIS RJE RIN PO CHE LA DNGOS SU STZAL BA'I GDAMS PA KHYAD PAR CAN YIN,
Now in order to achieve the Buddha's body of form,32
a person must first
gather together what we refer to as the "collection of merit." This gathering
depends principally on the desire to achieve Buddhahood for the sake of every
living being. To achieve the Buddha's dharma body, a person must have the
"collection of wisdom." Here the most important thing is to develop correct
view. All the most vital points of the path then have been packed into the
three principal paths, and made into an instruction which can be carried out
by students. These words of advice, imparted directly to our precious lord by
Gentle Voice himself, are therefore very special indeed.

DE YANG THOG MAR BLO CHOS SU 'GRO BA LA NGES 'BYUNG , CHOS THEG PA CHEN PO'I LAM DU 'GRO BA LA BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS, SGRIB PA GNYIS YONGS SU SPONG BA LA YANG DAG PA'I LTA BA MED THABS MED PAS DE GSUM LA LAM GYI GTZO BO RNAM GSUM ZHES GSUNGS,
There's no way to turn your mind to spiritual practice unless you have
renunciation from the very first. And there's no way for this practice to serve
as a path of the greater way unless you have the desire to become a Buddha
for the sake of every living being. And there's no way to rid yourself totally
of the two obstacles33
unless you have correct view. This is why these three
attitudes were spoken to be the "three principal paths."

LAM GTZO GSUM PO 'DI LA MYONG BA ZHIG THON PHYIN CHAD BYAS TSAD CHOS SU 'GRO BA ZHIG 'ONG , 'DI GSUM GYIS MA ZIN NA CI BYAS 'KHOR BA'I RGYU LAS MA 'DAS PA YIN TE, LAM RIM CHEN MO LAS,
Once you have gained some facility in the three principal paths, everything
you do becomes a spiritual practice. If your mind is not filled with these three
thoughts, then everything you try leads you nowhere further than the same old
circle of births. As the Greater Steps to Buddhahood says,

DE LTAR NA 'KHOR BA LA RNAM GRANGS DU MAR NYES DMIGS SU BRTAGS TE BSGOMS PAS 'KHOR BA'I PHUN TSOGS LA SRED PA SUN 'BYIN PA'I GNYEN PO YANG MA RNYED, BDAG MED PA'I DON LA SO SOR RTOG PA'I SHES RAB KYIS TSUL BZHIN DU YANG MA DPYAD, BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS GNYIS LA GOMS PAR BYED PA DANG BRAL BA'I DGE SBYOR RNAMS NI   
Suppose you try to perform some kind of virtuous deeds, but
you have yet to find that special antidote that destroys your
tendency to crave for the good things of this circling life--you
have yet to succeed in that meditation where you've analyzed all
the drawbacks of the circle of life using all the various reasons
we've set forth above. Suppose too that you still haven't been
able to investigate the meaning of "no self-nature" as you should,
using the analytical type of wisdom. And let's say further that
you still lack any familiarity with the two types of desire to reach
Buddhahood for every living being.34

ZHING GI MTHU LA BRTEN PA 'GA' RE MA GTOGS PA KUN 'BYUNG RANG DGA' BAR 'GRO BAS 'KHOR BA'I 'KHOR LO BSKOR BA YIN NO, , ZHES GSUNGS PA YIN,
If you happen to do a few good deeds this way towards some
particularly holy object, you might get some good results, but
only because of the object's power. Otherwise everything you've
done is simply the same old source of suffering--and you come
back round around the round of rebirth.35

'DI LA DGONGS NAS BKA' GDAMS GONG MAS KYANG , BSGOM RGYU'I LHA GZUGS RE DANG 'DREN RGYU'I SNGAGS RE TA KUN LA 'ONG STE BSAM RGYU'I CHOS SHIG MED PAS LAN PA YIN, ZHES GSUNGS SO, ,
The Seers of the Word in olden days were making the same point when they
used to say, "Everybody's got some mystic being they're meditating about and
everybody's got some mystic words that they're talking about and all because
nobody's got any real practice they're thinking about."36

DE'I PHYIR RANG CAG RNAMS KYANG CHOS GSHA' MA ZHIG BYED BSAM NA CI BYAS THAR PA DANG THAMS CAD MKHYEN PA'I RGYUR 'GRO BA ZHIG DGOS, DE 'ONG BA LA LAM GTZO GSUM LA MYONG BA THON PA ZHIG DGOS, 'DI GSUM NI BYANG CHUB LAM GYI RIM PA'I SNYING PO'AM SROG LTA BU YIN TE, RJE THAMS CAD MKHYEN PAS, LAM SGRON BSHAD BYA RTZA BA'I GZHUNG DANG , 'DI GSUM LAM GYI SROG TU BYAS NAS BSHAD PA YIN GSUNGS,
Therefore those of us who are thinking about doing some really pure practice
of the spirit should try to find one that will take us on to freedom and all-
knowingness. And for a practice to be this way, it should make us masters in
the three principal paths. These three are like the heart, the very life within the
teachings on the steps to Buddhahood. As the all-knowing Lord, Tsongkapa,
once said: "I used the Lamp on the Path as my basic text, and made these three
the very life of the path."37

DES NA DA LAM 'DIR YANG RJE'I GSUNG LAM GTZO RNAM GSUM GYI RTZA TSIG GI STENG NAS 'KHRID MDOR BSDUS TZAM 'BUL BA LA,
So now we ourselves will give just a brief teaching using the Three Principal
Paths--the words of this same Lord Tsongkapa--as our basic text.
III. An Offering of Praise

THOG MAR SA BCAD KYI DBANG DU BYAS NA, LAM GYI GTZO BO RNAM GSUM GYI 'KHRID LA GSUM, BSTAN BCOS BRTZOM PA LA 'JUG PA'I YAN LAG DANG , BSTAN BCOS SPYI'I LUS DNGOS, BSHAD PA MTHAR PHYIN PA'I BYA BA'O, , DANG PO LA GSUM, MCHOD PAR BRJOD PA, RTZOM PAR DAM BCA' BA, NYAN PAR BSKUL BA'O, ,
We'll start by discussing the general outline of the work. This instruction on
the three principal paths comes in three basic divisions: the preliminaries that
lead into the composition of the text, the main body of the text, and the
conclusion of the explanation. The first of these divisions has three sections of
its own: an offering of praise, a pledge to compose the work, and then a strong
encouragement for the reader to study it well.

DANG PO NI,
,RJE BTZUN BLA MA RNAMS LA PHYAG 'TSAL LO,
,ZHES PAS BSTAN,
What we call the "offering of praise" is contained in the opening line of the
work:
I bow to all the high and holy lamas.

DE YANG BSTAN BCOS RTZOM PA'I THOG MAR RANG GI LHAG PA'I LHA LA PHYAG BYA DGOS TE, SLOB DPON DAnd''I,
,SHIS BRJOD PHYAG BYA NGO BO NI,
,NGES PAR BSTAN PA'ANG DE YI SGO,
,ZHES DANG , RANG NYID 'DOD PA'I LHA LA PHYAG BYA'O, , ZHES GSUNGS,
The very first thing a person should do when he composes a commentary is
to bow to his lord of lords. As Master Dandin said,
The benediction, bow, and the essence
Must be written: they are the door.38
And we read as well that, "One should bow to the one he holds his lord."

'DI NI BSTAN BCOS RTZOM PA'I BYA BA MTHAR PHYIN PA DANG , BAR CHAD MI 'BYUNG BA'I PHYIR YIN, 'DIR BLA MA RNAMS ZHES PA'I RNAMS SGRAS SPYIR RGYA CHEN SPYOD BRGYUD DANG , ZAB MO LTA BRGYUD SOGS DNGOS BRGYUD KYI BLA MA RNAMS DANG , THUN MONG MA YIN PA NI MKHYEN SRID MA LTAR RGYAL BA RDO RJE 'CHANG , RJE BTZUN 'JAM DPAL DBYANGS, DPA' BO RDO RJE RNAMS YIN,
The purpose of this prostration is that one be able to bring his composition to
its completion, and that he do so without any interruptions or obstacles. The
word "all" in the expression "all the lamas" is meant to refer in a general sense
to all of one's immediate and lineage lamas--those who have passed on the
teachings through traditions like those known as the "far-reaching activity" and
the "profound view."39
In a very special sense, the word has the meaning that
we see it given in the prayer called "Knowledge Unlocks the World": it refers
to the victor, Diamond Holder; to the glorious lord, Gentle Voice; and to the
Hero of the Diamond.40

RJE BTZUN 'JAM PA'I DBYANGS NI RJE TZONG KHA PA CHEN PO LA RTAG TU ZHAL GZIGS PA YIN, ZHAL GZIGS TSUL LA'ANG RMI LAM DU GZIGS PA DANG , NYAMS LA GZIGS PA, DNGOS SU GZIGS PA GSUM YOD, DNGOS LA'ANG DBANG SHES LA GZIGS PA DANG , YID SHES LA GZIGS PA GNYIS LAS, 'JAM MGON TZONG KHA PA CHEN PO LA NI BLA MA DANG SLOB MA'I TSUL DU DBANG SHES LA GZIGS NAS MDO SNGAGS KYI CHOS THAMS CAD 
GSAN PA RED,
Now the lord, Gentle Voice, was appearing constantly to the great Tsongkapa.
There are different ways such a being can appear to a person: you can see him
in a dream, in your imagination, or directly. There are two ways you can see
him directly: either with your physical senses, or with your mental sense. The
way that Gentle Voice appeared to our protector, the great Tsongkapa, was
straight to his physical senses; they sat like teacher and student, and
Tsongkapa was able to learn from him every one of the open and secret
teachings.

GZHAN 'GA' SHAS KYIS RJE BLA MAS MKHAS PA DANG BTZUN PA TZAM GYIS BSTAN BCOS MDZAD PA RED BSAM PA YOD KYANG , RJE TZONG KHA PA CHEN PO'I GSUNG NI BSTAN BCOS CHE CHUNG GA 'DRA ZHIG YIN YANG RJE BTZUN 'JAM PA'I DBYANGS KYIS MA GSUNGS PA GCIG KYANG MED, MA MTHAR BZHUGS GNAS DANG ZHABS PHYI DU TZAM 'KHRID TSUN CHAD KYANG RJE BTZUN LA ZHU GNANG GIS BKA' LTAR MDZAD PA RED,
We do see some people who think otherwise: that our Lord Lama was able to
write his various treatises merely out of some scholastic skill and moral depth.
The truth though is that there is not a single example in all the writings of
Lord Tsongkapa--no single treatise, great or small--that was not spoken by
Gentle Voice himself. Lord Tsongkapa consulted Gentle Voice in every single
thing he did, and followed the instructions he was given--even down to where
he should stay, and how many attendants he should take with him when he
went somewhere.

MDO SNGAGS KYI ZAB GNAD KHYAD PAR CAN SNGAR GYI MKHAS PA KUN GYIS MA RTOGS PA THAMS CAD KYANG RJE BLA MAS GTAN LA PHAB NAS GSUNGS, DE YANG RJE BTZUN GYI GSUNG LAS RJE BLA MA RANG NYID KYIS 'OL TSOD DU GSUNGS PA GTAN NAS MED,
This Lord of Lamas was able to make definitive explanations of every deep
and vital point in both the open and secret teachings--of things that all the
sages gone before had never been able to fathom. These explanations are in
no way something that Lord Tsongkapa came up with on his own; they came,
rather, from the lips of Gentle Voice himself.

SPYIR BSTAN BCOS RNAMS SU MCHOD BRJOD MDZAD YUL SNYING RJE DANG , MKHYEN GSUM SOGS MANG YANG , 'DIR BLA MA LA BSTOD PHYAG MDZAD PA NI SPYIR LAM RIM, KHYAD PAR LAM GTZO RNAM GSUM RGYUD LA SKYE BA BSHES GNYEN BSTEN TSUL LA RAG LAS PAR GO BA'I CHED DU BLA MA LA BSTOD PHYAG MDZAD PA YIN,
In general it is the custom, when one writes the offering of praise at the
beginning of a Buddhist treatise, to express obeisance to compassion, the three
types of knowledge,41
or any other of a great many holy objects. Here though
the prostration is made to "the lamas," for a very good reason. The reader
wants in general to gain the steps of the path to Buddhahood--and more
specifically, the three principal paths--within his own mind. The point of the
prostration is to make him realize that this is all going to depend on how well
he can follow the practice of proper behavior towards his spiritual teacher.

Notes to Reading Two
7. Door to the Noble Path: The edition of Pabongka Rinpoche's commentary
translated here is listed at bibliography entry 46; the original verses by Lord
Tsongkapa are found in his collected works at entry 68. Some other useful
explanations of Lord Tsongkapa's Three Principal Paths are those by the
following masters:
The Great Fifth Dalai Lama, Ngawang Lobsang Gyatso (1617-1682) at
entries 16 and 17;
Tsechok Ling, Yeshe Gyeltsen (1713-1793) at entries 78 and 79;
Tendar Hlarampa (b. 1759) at entry 30;
Welmang Konchok Gyeltsen (1764-1853) at entry 7;
Ngulchu Dharmabhadra (1772-1851) at entries 37 and 38; as well as
Mokchok Trulku (modern) at entry 59.
8. Holder of the Diamond: A form of the Buddha in which he gives secret
teachings.
9. the saffron robe: The robes of a human, Buddhist monk.
10. secret three of every Victor: The mystery of body, speech, and mind of every
one of the countless Buddhas. Buddhas are called "Victors" because they have
overcome the obstacles that prevent one from eliminating all bad thoughts and
knowing all things.
11. Gentle Voice: Divine form representing all the wisdom of the Buddhas.
12. Three Principal Paths: "Path" in Buddhist philosophy refers to a stage of
mental realization. The title has often been translated as "Three Principles of
the Path," but the point is that renunciation, the wish for enlightenment, and
correct view are each one a principal path.
13. Dharma: A word of many meanings, most often "spiritual teachings" or
"existing object."
14. all three realms: Meaning all the world. Buddhism teaches that there are

three realms of existence. We live in the "desire" realm, so called because our
principal interests are food and sex. Higher up is the "form" realm, where
beings live in a state of meditation and have beautiful forms. Even higher is
the "formless" realm, where beings are free of gross suffering and have only
mental bodies.
15. More than a wishing jewel... From the very brief version of Lord Tsongkapa's
Steps on the Path to Buddhahood (f. 56a, bibliography entry 63). The entire
context appears below in the discussion of renunciation.
16. three "problems of the pot": How not to listen to a teaching--like a pot with
the lid closed (not paying attention to what is going on), a pot full of grime
(listening with ignoble motivations, such as the desire for a big reputation),
and a pot with the bottom fallen out (not retaining what was heard--one is
advised to review daily with one's fellow students). See Lord Tsongkapa's
greater Steps on the Path, entry 61, f. 16; as well as Pabongka Rinpoche's famed
Liberation in Our Hands, entry 47, ff. 54-5.
17. six images for the instruction: How one should listen to a teaching--
a) Think of yourself as a patient, for your mental afflictions (desire and
the rest) make you sick.
b) Think of the dharma as medicine.
c) Think of your teacher as a master physician.
d) Think of following his teachings exactly, and as long as needed, as
following the doctor's orders to get better.
e) Think of the Buddhas as infallible, or of the Infallible One (your
teacher) as a Buddha.
f) Pray that this great cure, the teachings of the Buddhas, may long
remain in the world.
See Lord Tsongkapa, entry 61, ff. 16-19, and Pabongka Rinpoche, entry 47, ff.
55-61.
18. three lands: That is, below the earth (where the serpent- beings and similar
creatures live), upon the earth (where men are found), and in the sky above the
earth (where deities make their home).
19. Ngawang Drakpa: See the Foreword for a description of this disciple's life.

20. three different scopes: The wish to escape oneself from the lower realms, the
wish to escape oneself from the entire circle of life, and the wish to achieve full
enlightenment for the sake of every living being.
21. lives of misery: A birth in the hells, as an insatiable spirit, or as an animal.
22. Channels and Winds, etc.: All highly advanced practices from the secret
teachings of the Buddha.
23. Geshe Puchungwa (1031-1106) and Chen-ngawa (1038-1103): Source of
quotation not found. Geshe Puchungwa, full name Shunnu Gyeltsen, was one
of the "three great brothers," direct disciples of Lord Drom Tonpa who helped
him found and spread the Seer tradition of the early Tibetan Buddhist masters
(see notes 36 and 49 below). Chen-ngawa, also known as Tsultrim Bar, was
another of the three, as was the great Potowa (see note 42).
24. five sciences: Classical grammar, logic, Buddhist theory, the fine arts, and
medicine.
25. five types of clairvoyance: Supernormal powers of emanation, sight, hearing,
perception of the past, and knowledge of others' thoughts.
26. eight great attainments: These are to gain "the sword," which allows one to
travel anywhere; "the pill," which enables you to become invisible or assume
any outer form; "the eye ointment," which helps you see minute or very distant
objects; "swift feet," the ability to travel at high speeds; "taking essence," an
ability to live off nothing but tiny bits of sustenance; "sky walk," the ability to
fly; and "underground," the power to pass through solid ground like a fish
through water.
27. Lord Atisha (982-1054): Full name Dipamkara Shri Jnyana, illustrious Indian
sage who brought the teachings of the Steps of the path to Tibet. Author of
Lamp on the Path, a prototype text of this genre (bibliography entry 57).
28. the Brahmin's son Tsanakya: In his classic work on the Steps to Buddhahood,
Pabongka Rinpoche explains that Tsanakya was able to master the difficult
secret practice of the Lord of Death, but fell to the lowest hell because he used
his knowledge to harm other beings (f. 225b, entry 47).
29. master meditator of Lo Diamond: The Rinpoche's Liberation in Our Hands
again explains (f. 291b, entry 47). The practitioner undertook one of the most
powerful practices of the secret teachings, but due to his less than perfect
motivation was able to achieve only a lower result. Lord Atisha notes here
that such practitioners had even dropped to the hells.

30. giving, morality, etc.: The first five of the six Buddhist perfections. The last
is the perfection of wisdom.
31. Suppose you fail... Quotation from Lord Tsongkapa's report to his teacher
and disciple, the venerable Rendawa, on teachings received from Gentle Voice
himself (ff. 2b-3a, entry 62).
32. body of form and dharma body: The physical form of a Buddha and his mind
(along with this mind's ultimate nature) are called the "form body" and
"dharma body," respectively.
33. two obstacles: See note 10.
34. two types of desire to reach Buddhahood: See note 136.
35. Suppose you try... Quotation from Lord Tsongkapa's opus magnum (f. 156b,
entry 61).
36. Everybody's got some mystic being... Original source of quotation not found;
it appears also in Pabongka Rinpoche's Liberation in Our Hands (f. 294a, entry
47). The Seers of the Word were an eminent group of early Buddhist masters
in Tibet whose lineage descended from Lord Atisha and his principal disciple,
Lord Drom Tonpa. The school's name in Tibetan, "Kadampa," is explained as
meaning that they were able to see the Word of the Buddha (ka) as personal
instruction (dam) that applied immediately to their own practice.
37. I used the "Lamp on the Path": The full context of this quotation appears in
Pabongka Rinpoche's Liberation in Our Hands (f. 37b, entry 47); it reveals much
of the sources of our text and restates its comprehensive nature. Lord
Tsongkapa has just related the contents of a major section of his massive
Greater Steps on the Path to Buddhahood to his divine mentor, Gentle Voice. And
then,
Gentle Voice asked the Lord in a playful way,"Well now, is there
anything in your work that isn't covered in those three principal
paths I taught you?"
Lord Tsongkapa replied, "This is how I composed my work. I
took the three principal paths which you, oh Holy One, taught
me, and made them the very life of the path. I used the Lamp on
the Path as my basic text, and supplemented it with many other
advices of the Seers of the Word."
38. Master Dandin: Hindu poet dated to about the 7th Century A.D., author of

The Mirror of Poetics, a renowned treatise on composition (quotation on f. 322b,
entry 34). We have not been able to locate the next quotation in the text.
39. traditions of "far-reaching activity" and "profound view": Refer, respectively, to
the teachings on the wish for enlightenment and correct view (the former
assuming renunciation, the third principal path). See also note 195.
40. "Knowledge Unlocks the World": Famed verses of supplication by Lord
Tsongkapa himself, named from the opening line (see f. 3a, entry 65). The
three beings mentioned are different forms of the Buddha.
41. three types of knowledge: Realizations of the true nature of reality, in varying
degrees.

50
The Asian Classics Institute
Course I: The Principal Teachings of Buddhism
Reading Three
IV. How to Take A Lama

DE YANG CHOS BYED PA'I THOG MAR BLA MA GAL CHE STE, DGE BSHES PO TO BAS, RNAM GROL BSGRUB PA LA BLA MA LAS GAL CHE BA MED DE, TSE 'DI'I BYA BA BLTAS NAS BYAS PAS CHOG PA LA'ANG SLOB MKHAN MED PAR MI 'ONG NA, NGAN SONG NAS 'ONGS MA THAG PA 'GRO MA MYONG BA'I SAR 'GRO BA LA BLA MA MED PAR GA NA 'ONG GSUNGS,
Now a lama is extremely important at the outset of any attempts at a spiritual
life. As Geshe Potowa said,
To reach liberation, there is nothing more important than a lama.
Even in simple things of this present life, with things that you
can learn just by sitting down and watching someone, you can't
get anywhere without a person to show you. So how on earth
are you going to get anywhere without a lama, when you want
to go somewhere you've never gone before, and you've only just
arrived from a journey through the lower births?42

DES NA DPE CHA BLTA SHES PA TZAM GYIS MI 'ONG BAS BLA MA ZHIG NGES PAR BSTEN DGOS, BLA MA MED PAR DPE CHA BLTAS PA TZAM GYIS GRUB PA THOB PA SNGON YANG GCIG KYANG MA BYUNG ZHING , PHYIS KYANG 'BYUNG BA MI SRID PA YIN,
Therefore you're absolutely going to have to go and learn from a lama; just
reading dharma books is not going to work. There has never been a single
person in history who gained his spiritual goals without a lama, just by
reading books on dharma. And it will never happen in the future either.

BLA MA DE YANG DPER NA NYIN GCIG GI 'GRO SA'I LAM STON MKHAN KYANG LAM RGYUS LA MKHAS PA ZHIG DGOS PA LTAR THAR PA DANG THAMS CAD MKHYEN PA'I GO 'PHANG DU 'KHRID PA'I BLA MA DE YANG MTSAN NYID DANG LDAN PA ZHIG DGOS, DE MED NA BLA MA BZANG NGAN JI 'DRA ZHIG YOD NA SLOB MA YANG DE DANG 'DRA BAR S'ATZTSA BRKOS PHOR NAS BTON PA LTAR 'ONG BAS BLA MA MTSAN LDAN GAL CHE,
Now what kind of lama should he be? It takes a guide who knows every turn
of the path just to get you somewhere you can reach in a single day. For a
lama who's supposed to lead you on to freedom and the state of knowing all
things, you're going to need one who has all the requisite qualities. It's
important to find a really qualified lama; it's not something you shouldn't care
much about, because you're going to end up like him--for better or for worse.
The student comes out according to the mold, like those little clay tablets with
holy images pressed into them.

BLA MA'I MTSAN NYID KYANG 'DUL BA LA, YON TAN 'BYUNG GNAS SOGS LTAR BRTAN MKHAS KYI YON TAN GNYIS DANG LDAN PA ZHIG DANG , SNGAGS LA, SGO GSUM LEGS BSDAMS SOGS LTAR DANG , MDO SNGAGS SPYIR BTANG LA, GANG DANG LDAN NA SOGS LTAR YON TAN BCU DANG LDAN PA,
What are the characteristics that make a lama qualified? According to the
teachings on vowed morality he should be, as they say, a "source of all good
qualities" and so on.43
This means that the lama should possess the two good
qualities of being steady and wise.44
According to the secret teachings, he
should fit the description that starts with the words "all three gateways well
restrained." According to general tradition--that of both the open and the
secret teachings--the lama should have ten fine qualities, as mentioned in the
verse that begins with "You who have all ten..."

MA MATH BSLAB PA GSUM GYIS THUGS RGYUD DUL BA, LUNG DANG LDAN PA, RTOGS PA DANG LDAN PA ZHIG NGES PAR DGOS TE, MDO SDE RGYAN LAS,
,BSHES GNYEN DUL BA ZHI BA NYER ZHI BA,
,YON TAN LHAG PA BRTZON BCAS LUNG GIS 
PHYUG,DE NYID RAB TU RTOGS PA SMRA MKHAS LDAN,
,BRTZE BA'I BDAG NYID SKYO BA SPANGS LA BRTEN,
,ZHES GSUNGS,
At the very least, your lama must absolutely be a person who has controlled
his mind by practicing the three trainings,45
who possesses a knowledge of the
scriptures, and who possesses actual realizations. As the Jewel of the Sutras
states,
Take yourself to a spiritual guide controlled,
at peace,
High peace, with exceeding qualities and effort,
who's rich
In scripture, with a deep realization of suchness,
a master instructor
Who's the very image of love, and beyond becoming
discouraged.46

BLA MA'I MTSAN NYID DE DAG NI SLOB MAS KYANG SHES PAR BYAS TE DE DANG LDAN PA'I BLA MA BTZAL DGOS, BLA MA YON TAN CHE CHUNG SOGS JI 'DRA ZHIG YOD KYANG SLOB MA YANG SKAL BA BZANG ZHAN DE DANG MTHUN PA ZHIG YONG STE, BLA MA MDO SNGAGS KYI LAM YONGS RDZOGS LA 'KHRID THUB PA ZHIG BSTEN NA SLOB MA DE YANG LAM YONGS RDZOGS THOS PA DANG , GO BA CHAGS PA'I SKAL LDAN ZHIG 'BYUNG , LAM YONGS RDZOGS LA GO BA TZAM CHAGS NA'ANG YON TAN GZHAN DANG GZHAN YOD PA LAS BSOD NAMS CHE,
The prospective disciple on his part should familiarize himself with these
descriptions of a proper lama's qualifications, and then seek out a lama who
possesses them. Whether the disciple himself turns out to be more or less
blessed with virtues depends on the degree to which his lama possesses high
personal qualities. If the disciple enjoys a relationship with a lama who is
capable of guiding him through the entire range of the open and secret paths,
then the disciple will come to be one blessed, in the sense of having heard
about and gained some understanding of the paths in their entirety. Even just
gaining this general idea of the overall paths represents greater merit that any
other good qualities that the student might possess.

DE LTA BU'I BLA MA RNYED NAS TSUL BZHIN DU BSTEN DGOS, DE LA SANGS RGYAS KYI GO 'PHANG LA NYE BA SOGS BSTEN PA'I PHAN YON BRGYAD DANG , DE LAS LDOG PA MA BSTEN PA'I NYES DMIGS BRGYAD YOD,
Once the disciple does manage to locate a lama with the qualities described
above, he must rely on him in the proper way. Here there are eight great
benefits a person can gain through proper behavior towards his teacher,
beginning with being "close to Buddhahood."47
There are also eight different
dangers of improper behavior towards one's lama--these are the opposites of
the benefits just mentioned.

RJE TZONG KHA PA CHEN POS KYANG ,
,DE NAS 'DI PHYI'I LEGS TSOGS JI SNYED PA'I,
,RTEN 'BREL LEGS PAR 'GRIGS PA'I RTZA BA NI,
,LAM STON BSHES GNYEN DAM PA 'BAD PA YIS,
,BSAM DANG SBYOR BAS TSUL BZHIN BSTEN PA RU,
,MTHONG NAS SROG GI PHYIR YANG MI GTONG BAR,
,BKA' BZHIN SGRUB PA'I MCHOD PAS MNYES PAR BYED,
,RNAL 'BYOR NGAS KYANG NYAMS LEN DE LTAR BYAS,
,THAR 'DOD KHYED KYANG DE BZHIN BSKYANG 'TSAL LO,
,ZHES GSUNGS,
As the great Lord Tsongkapa said himself,
First then see that the very root for getting
an excellent start
Towards any of the goods things in the present
or future lives
Is effort in proper behavior in both thought
and practice towards
The spiritual guide who shows the path; so
please him with the offering
Of carrying out his every instruction,
never giving up
A single one even when it may cost you
your life.
I, the master meditator, put this
into practice;
You, who seek for freedom, must
conduct yourselves this way.48

SNGAR GYI JO 'BROM SOGS KYANG RTOGS PA DANG MDZAD 'PHRIN 'GRAN ZLA MED PA BYUNG BA DE RANG RANG GI BLA MA RNAMS LA BSHES GNYEN BSTEN TSUL TSUL BZHIN MDZAD PA LAS BYUNG BA RED, DER MA ZAD SNGAR GYI RJE MID LA SOGS KYANG DE LTAR YIN,
Those of past days, people like Lord Atisha and the great Drom Tonpa,49
gained matchless levels of realization and were able to perform mighty deeds
beyond equal--all of this came because each of them succeeded in maintaining
the proper relationship with his own spiritual guide. And it doesn't end
there--we can point to Lord Milarepa50
and others of olden days, and say
exactly the same thing.

BSHES GNYEN BSTEN TSUL 'DI NAS RTEN 'BREL LEGS NYES KYI KHE NYEN CHE, N'A RO PA'I DRUNG NAS MAR PA YANG RTEN 'BREL 'PHYUGS, MID LAS MAR PAR ZANGS STONG PA DRI MED CIG PHUL BAS RTEN 'BREL LEGS NYES DE BZHIN DU MA 'CHOL BAR BYUNG ,
Proper behavior with one's spiritual guide has tremendous potential--both
good and bad--in determining whether a person gets off to an auspicious start
in his practice. Marpa slipped before Naropa and ruined his chances for an
auspicious beginning.51
Milarepa offered Marpa a copper pot--empty, but
absolutely clean. His start with his practice then was one both good and
bad--in exact correspondence to the good and bad of the gift.

KHRI CHEN BSTAN PA RAB RGYAS KYIS YONGS 'DZIN NGAG DBANG CHOS 'BYOR LA SNYUN G-YOG RLABS CHEN MDZAD PAS DBU MA'I LTA BA RTOGS, SA PAn GYIS RJE BTZUN GRAGS RGYAN GYI SNYUN G-YOG TSUL BZHIN BSGRUBS PAS BLA MA 'JAM PA'I DBYANGS SU MTHONG , RIG GNAS LNGA THOGS MED MKHYEN, RGYA BOD HOR SOGS KYI CHE RGU DU MAS GTZUG TU BKUR BA SOGS BYUNG BA YIN,
The great throneholder Tenpa Rabgye nursed the master tutor Ngawang
Chujor most effectively during the latter's illness; as a result, he was able to
gain a realization of the "middle view."52
The Sakya Pandita as well performed
perfect service as the nurse of Venerable Drak-gyen. Everything that came to
him later was because of this service: he was able to see his lama as the deity
Gentle Voice; he gained a totally unimpeded knowledge of the five great
sciences; a mass of human kind in all the lands of China, Tibet, Mongolia, and
elsewhere raised him in honor to the very tip of their heads; and the list goes
on and on.53

BSTEN TSUL LOG PA'I NYES DMIGS KYANG , DGRA NAG GI DKA' 'GREL DU DRANGS PA LAS,
,TSIGS BCAD GCIG TZAM MNYAN PA LA,
,GANG GIS BLA MAR MI 'DZIN PA,
,KHYI YI SKYE GNAS BRGYAR SKYES NAS,
,SME SHA CAN DU SKYE BAR 'GYUR,
,ZHES DANG ,
We should speak here too of the dangers in improper behavior towards one's
lama. A reference in Difficult Points to the Black Enemy puts it this way:
A person who doesn't treat as a lama
Someone who's taught him so much as a line
Will take a hundred births as a dog
And then be born in the lowest of castes.54

DUS 'KHOR RTZA RGYUD LAS,
,BLA MA LA KHROS SKAD CIG GRANGS,
,BSKAL PAR BSAGS PA'I DGE BCOM NAS,
,DE SNYED BSKAL PAR DMYAL SOGS KYI,
,SDUG BSNGAL TSOR BA DRAG PO MYONG ,
The root text of the secret teaching on the Wheel of Time states as well:
Seconds of anger toward your lama
Destroy equal eons of virtue collected,
Then bring equal eons in which you endure
The terrible pain of hells and the rest.55

,ZHES GSUNGS PA LTAR SKYES BUS SE GOL GCIG GTOG PA'I YUN LA BYA RDZOGS KYI SKAD 
CIG MA DRUG CU RE LNGA YOD PAS, BYA RDZOGS KYI SKAD CIG MA DRUG CU RTZA LNGA'I RING BLA MA LA KHRO SEMS SKYES NA BSKAL PA DRUG CU RTZA LNGA'I YUN LA DMYAL BAR GNAS DGOS, 'DI THEG PA 'OG MA'I LUGS LTAR YIN, THEG CHEN GYI LUGS LA DE LAS KYANG YUN RING BA YOD,
Now the length of time in the snap of a finger is itself made up of no less than
sixty-five of what we call "instants of minimum action." If an emotion of anger
towards your lama comes up in your mind for this period, for sixty-five of
these split-seconds, then you will have to stay in hell for a period equal to
sixty-five eons. This by the way is how the tradition of the lesser way describes
it; according to the teachings of the greater way, the period is even longer.56

DER MA ZAD BSHES GNYEN BSTEN TSUL LOG NA BLA MA LNGA BCU PA LAS GSUNGS PA LTAR TSE 'DIR YANG NAD GDON SOGS KYIS GTZES PA DANG , 'CHI KHAR GNAD GCOD 'JIGS SKRAG TSAD MED PAS MNAR BA DANG , DUS MIN 'CHI RKYEN BCU GSUM GANG RUNG GIS 'CHI BA SOGS DANG ,
And there are even more dangers; a person who behaves improperly towards
his lama will, as the Fifty Verses on Lamas describes, suffer even more in this
present life: spirits, various sicknesses, and other such problems will harass
him constantly. In the hour of death, he is tormented by excruciating pain at
the vital points and overwhelmed by terror. Moreover, he dies through one
of the thirteen causes of a premature death--and so on.57

GZHAN YANG , SLOB DPON SANGS RGYAS YE SHES KYI SPYAN LHUNG BA DANG , DGE BSHES SNE'U ZUR PA'I SLOB MA LA 'CHI RKYEN BYUNG BSOGS LTAR, MDOR NA BLA MA LA BRNYAS SMOD BYAS PA'I RNAM SMIN NI SANGS RGYAS KYIS KYANG GSUNG BAR MI NUS PA'I TSUL TZAM GYIS CHE PHYI MAR DMYAL BA MNAR MED DU SKYE BAR GSUNGS,
There are even further examples of the dangers; we can recall the master
Sangye Yeshe,58
whose eyes dropped out of their sockets, or the disciple of
Geshe Neusurpa who met with an untimely death, among others.59
In short,
it is stated that the result which ripens onto a person in his future lives once
he has spoken ill of his lama is so horrible that even a Buddha would be
incapable of describing it fully. The person takes his rebirth in the lowest of
all hells, known as "Torment Without," where the pain goes on without
stopping.

BLA MA BSTEN TSUL YANG BKA' CHOS GNANG MKHAN DANG , KA KHA SLOB MKHAN GNYIS LA KHYAD MED DGOS, BLA MA BSTEN PA'I RING RANG DON DU KHA TON BYAS PA LTA BU MA GTOGS PA SRI ZHU BKUR STI SOGS ZHABS TOG SGRUB TSAD BLA MA'I RNAL 'BYOR YIN PAS BLA MA'I RNAL 'BYOR GYI DMIGS PA GZHAN NAS TSOL MI DGOS,
When we speak of "proper behavior towards your lama," it's necessary for the
student to realize that we draw no distinction between the person who delivers
him formal dharma teachings and the person who teaches him the alphabet
and so on. Whatever a disciple undertakes in the service of his lama during
the length of their relationship--whether it be attending to him, paying him
respects, or so on, everything except those minor things like the personal daily
recitations that the student does for himself--all of it counts as what we call
"lama practice." As such it is unnecessary for a disciple in the service of his
lama to go out and seek one of the other, formal meditative techniques that are
known as "lama practice."

BLA MA DE BSTEN TSUL LEGS NYES JI LTAR BYAS PA BZHIN PHAN YON BRGYAD DANG NYES DMIGS RNAMS SO SOR 'BYUNG , BSTEN PA'I TSE YANG BLA MA SANGS RGYAS YIN PAR RDO RJE 'CHANG GIS BZHED PA SOGS SA BCAD RNAMS BKRAM NAS DPYAD SGOM BYAS TE LUNG RIGS KYIS BSGRUB DGOS,
Each of the eight benefits and eight dangers comes up in exact accordance to
how well or poorly one behaves with his lama. During the relationship the
disciple should use what we call "analytical meditation." To do so, he first has
to lay out in his mind each separate point in the teaching on how to behave
towards a lama. For example, he could start with the fact that the Holder of

the Diamond declared a person's lama to be the Buddha himself.60
Then the
disciple should use various other cases of scriptural authority, together with
logical reasoning, to satisfy himself of the truth of each point.

DPYAD SGOM 'DI MED THABS MED KYANG BOD 'DIR DPYAD SGOM SGOM DU MKHYEN PA RJE TZONG KHA PA TZAM YIN, TSIG GI STENG NAS YID BSHAR BYED PA BSHAR SGOM DANG , SA BCAD RNAMS 'DI DANG 'DI'O SNYAM NAS 'DREN PA LTA BU NI GRANGS 'DREN BYAS PA YIN, DPYAD SGOM NI BSGRUB BYA RE ZHE PHUGS SU RTZA BAR BZHAG STE DE LA LUNG RIGS MANG POS DPYAD PA BYAS PA DE DPYAD SGOM YIN,
This type of analytical meditation is something that you absolutely can't do
without. Despite this fact, here in Tibet the only person to recognize analytical
meditation as a form of meditation was Lord Tsongkapa. There is a kind of
meditation known as "running" meditation, where you set your mind to run
along the concepts related to some words you are reciting. Then there is
"reviewing," where you try to recall each point in a particular teaching and
think to yourself simply "This one goes like this, and that one goes like that."
Analytical meditation is something different; here, you approach each point as
something you have to prove or disprove--you set it at center stage in your
mind and analyze it using a great number of statements from accepted
authorities, and various lines of reasoning.

DE YANG DPER NA RANG CAG GIS CHAGS YUL SOGS YANG YANG YID LA BYED PA DE DPYAD SGOM DANG , DE LA BRTEN NAS CHAGS SOGS NYON MONGS PA SHUGS CAN SKYES PA DE MYONG BA THON PA RED, DE KHA PHAR BSLOG NAS BLA MA SANGS RGYAS YIN PAR RDO RJE 'CHANG GIS BZHED PA SOGS LA RIM GYIS DPYAD SGOM BYAS NA RTOGS PA'I NYAMS MYONG MYUR DU SKYES PA 'ONG ,
As a matter of fact, it's "analytical meditation" for example when people like
us direct our thoughts over and over to some object that we desire, or
something similar. And because of this meditation our desire--or whatever
other unhealthy emotion it might be--gets stronger and stronger until we can

say we have gained some fluency in it. The idea here is to turn the process
around: to perform analytical meditations, one by one, on points such as the
fact that the Holder of the Diamond declared that one's lama is the Buddha
himself. This way we quickly come to a different type of fluency--in the
realization of truth.

LAM GTZO'I SKABS 'DIR BSHES GNYEN BSTEN TSUL TSIG 'DIS BSTAN PA YIN, RJE, BTZUN, BLA MA ZHES PA GSUM SKYES BU CHUNG , 'BRING , CHEN PO GSUM LA SBYAR TSUL YANG YOD,
The entire concept of how one should take himself to a lama in the proper way
is indicated here in the work on the principal paths with these simple words
of praise: "I bow to all the high and holy lamas." There is, incidentally, a way
you can interpret the words "high," "holy," and "lamas" in the line as referring
to persons of the lesser, middle, and greater scopes of practice.

Notes to Reading Three
42. To reach liberation... Geshe Potowa (1031-1105), full name Rinchen Sel, was
a master of the Seer tradition and one of the three great disciples of Lord Drom
Tonpa (see notes 23 and 49). His Metaphors (with commentary at entry 19) are
an important predecessor to later works on the Steps. The quotation here is
found on p. 14 of Hladri Gangpa's commentary to the Blue Book (see entry 89),
a compilation of the great Potowa's teachings written out by his student Geshe
Dolpa (see note 174).
43. source of good qualities: Opening words of a supplication from a famed
devotional text, the Offering to Lamas, by the venered Lobsang Chukyi Gyeltsen,
first of the illustrious Panchen Lamas of Tibet (p. 54, entry 51). The three
verses mentioned here read as follows:
Source of all good qualities, great sea
of morality;
Brimming with a mass of jewels, teachings
you have learned;
My lord, second Lord of the Able, wearing
a saffron robe;
I seek your blessing, master who keeps
the knowledge of the vows.
You who have all ten qualities that one
must possess to be
Worthy to teach the path of all those
who have gone to bliss;
Lord of the dharma, regent standing in
for every Victor;
I seek your blessing, spiritual guide
for the greater way.
All three gateways well restrained, wise,
and patient, and straight;

Free of guile, deception; learned in
the secrets and their texts;
Master at writing and edifying two tens
of secret lore;
I seek your blessing, first among all of
those who hold the diamond.
"Lord of the Able" refers to the present Buddha; the "ten qualities" are listed
in the verse directly following.
44. steady and wise: A Buddhist monk is "steady" when he has kept his vows
pure for at least ten years following his ordination. "Wise" refers to knowledge
of a whole list of subjects in the study of ethics, such as understanding what
is a moral downfall and what is not, or which misdeeds are more serious than
others.
45. the three trainings: These are exceptional morality, exceptional concentration,
and exceptional wisdom.
46. Jewel of the Sutras: A "sutra" is an open teaching of the Buddha. The verse
is from a famed commentary taught to Master Asanga (c. 350 A.D.) by Loving
One, the Future Buddha (ff. 20a- 20b, entry 43).
47. eight great benefits: The eight are described as coming close to Buddhahood,
pleasing the Buddhas, overcoming evil influences, avoiding improper activities
and thoughts, reaching high realizations, always meeting teachers, never falling
to the lower realms, and attaining temporary and ultimate goals with ease
(Lord Tsongkapa, entry 61, ff. 33-6; Pabongka Rinpoche, entry 47, ff. 124-9).
48. First then see... Again, quoted from the briefer version of his Steps on the
Path (f. 56a, entry 63).
49. the great Drom Tonpa (1005-1064): Full name Gyalway Jungne, most famed
disciple of Lord Atisha, himself the great progenitor of the teaching on the
Steps in Tibet. Founded the renowned Radreng Monastery in central Tibet.
The Blue Annals relate how he gained miraculous powers after clearing Lord
Atisha's excrement off the floor of the Master's cell (p. 259, entry 94). Lord
Atisha himself, it is said, took a perilous journey by sea for over a year to meet
one of his principal teachers in what is now Indonesia. After arriving, he
examined his teacher for some time before becoming his student, and then
served him for twelve years.

50. Lord Milarepa (1040-1123): The famed cave-meditator of Tibet, author of
some of the greatest spiritual poetry in any language (some examples appear
below in the section on renunciation). The hardships he undertook as a test
from his teacher Marpa are famous; see for example the Blue Annals, entry 94,
pp. 430-1.
51. Marpa (1012-1097) and Naropa (1016-1100): Marpa, also known as the "Great
Translator," was a teacher of Lord Milarepa and an early Tibetan Buddhist who
helped bring the secret teachings from India. His own teacher was Naropa, a
renowned Indian master who also instructed Lord Atisha. As Pabongka
Rinpoche again relates in his Liberation in Our Hands (f. 133a, entry 47), Marpa
was once faced with the choice of prostrating first to his teacher or to a
fantastic divine being who had made his appearance in the room; he made the
mistake of selecting the latter. Milarepa's offering to Marpa himself is
mentioned on the same folio.
52. throneholder Tenpa Rabgye and the master tutor Ngawang Chujor: Lobsang
Yeshe Tenpa Rabgye, also known as Achi Tuno Monhan, was a distinguished
scholar of the Gelukpa tradition of Tibetan Buddhism; his title indicates that
he held the throne passed down from Lord Tsongkapa himself. His collected
works--chiefly on the secret teachings--are still extant in two volumes (entry
32). From the colophons of these works we learn that he did most of his
writing at Ganden Monastery near Lhasa, and seems to have been born about
1758. Here he also states that he learned about the two forms of the wish for
enlightenment chiefly from the great Ngawang Chujor.
53. Sakya Pandita (1182-1251): Full name Kunga Gyeltsen, one of the greatest
spiritual teachers of all Central Asia, renowned translator and commentator of
the Buddhist canon, brought the tradition from Tibet to the Mongolians.
Venerable Drak-gyen (full name Drakpa Gyeltsen, 1147-1216) was his uncle and
mentor; see also note 86 below.
54. A person who doesn't treat as a lama... The quotation is found on f. 161b
(entry 82) of a commentary on the secret teaching of the Lord of Death
composed by Ratnakara Shanti, also known as Shantipa. He was a famed
master of the great Vikramashila Monastery in northeast India during the 10th
Century, and taught Lord Atisha before his journey to Tibet.
55. Wheel of Time: Original source for the quotation not found; it appears in
Pabongka Rinpoche's great work on the Steps of the path (f. 130b, entry 47),
attributed only to the "Wheel of Time" with no mention of "root text." The root
text for the secret teaching on the Wheel of Time was huge, twelve thousand
verses long, and only abridgements have been included in the Tibetan canon.
See entry 24 for the principal version.

56. the greater way: The Buddha gave various levels of teachings for disciples
of different capacities; these are known as the "greater" and "lesser" ways.
57. Fifty Verses on Lamas: Traditional manual on how to behave towards one's
spiritual guide, by the great Buddhist poet Ashvaghosha (c. 100 A.D.). The
thirteen causes of a premature death are listed on f. 10a (entry 29) and
explained by Lord Tsongkapa in his commentary (pp. 334-6, entry 66) as
follows: an unbearable pain in the skull, injury by various powerful animals,
different illnesses, demonic forces, plague, poison, authorities of the land, fire,
snakes, water, spirits, thieves, and fierce demigods. After dying in one of these
ways, the person descends directly to the hells.
58. the master Sangye Yeshe: In his masterpiece on the Steps to Buddhahood (f.
132a, entry 47), Pabongka Rinpoche relates the story of how the Indian master
Sangye Yeshe (not to be confused with the later Tibetan savant of the same
name) was delivering a teaching when he spotted his tutor passing by. This
was the great Paktsangwa, whose name means "Swineherd," for he was posing
as a common pig farmer. Sangye Yeshe pretended not to notice his lama, so
he would not have to pay the pig herder obeisance before his assembled
students. He later swore to his teacher that he had not seen him, and as a
result his eyes fell from their sockets. The account is also mentioned in passing
by Sonam Hlay Wangpo in his book of illustrations for the Heap of Jewel
Metaphors (p. 172, entry 88).
59. disciple of Geshe Neusurpa: Pabongka Rinpoche, on the same folio as the
preceding note, somewhat elucidates by saying that the disciple had failed in
his pledges to his teacher and so showed great terror at the moment of his
death; the disciple's name is not mentioned. Geshe Neusurpa, full name Yeshe
Bar (1042-1118), was one of the early Seer masters of Tibetan Buddhism; he
studied under Potowa and other great teachers, and counted among his many
disciples the illustrious Langri Tangpa Dorje Senge, author of the popular
Mental Training in Eight Verses.
60. the Buddha himself: A number of such declarations by the Buddha himself
that one's lama is the Buddha himself are quoted by Lord Tsongkapa himself
in his greater work on the Steps (see f. 29ff., entry 61).

65
The Asian Classics Institute
Course I: The Principal Teachings of Buddhism
Reading Four
V. A Pledge to Compose the Work

GNYIS PA RTZOM PAR DAM BCA' BA NI,
,RGYAL BA'I GSUNG RAB KUN GYI SNYING PO'I DON,
,RGYAL SRAS DAM PA RNAMS KYIS BSNGAGS PA'I LAM,
,SKAL LDAN THAR 'DOD RNAMS KYI 'JUG NGOGS DE,
,JI LTAR NUS BZHIN BDAG GIS BSHAD PAR BYA,
,ZHES PAS BSTAN TE,
Here we have reached the second of the preliminaries that lead into the
composition of the text. This is the pledge to compose the text, and is
contained in the very first verse:
(1)
As far as I am able I'll explain
The essence of all high teachings of the Victors,
The path that all their holy sons commend,
The entry point for the fortunate seeking freedom.

RGYAL BA'I GSUNG RAB KUN GYI SNYING PO'I DON GYI GTZO BO NYAMS SU LEN BYA DE LAM GTZO RNAM GSUM MAM LAM GYI RIM PA 'DI YIN, RGYAL BA'I GSUNG RAB THAMS CAD LAM GYI RIM PA GCIG TU DRIL TE GANG ZAG GCIG GIS NYAMS SU LEN BYAR YOD PA NI BYANG CHUB LAM RIM 'DI KHO NA LAS, GZHAN SA DGE RNYING GSUM SOGS KYI MDO SNGAGS ZUR PA GANG LA'ANG MED DE, GUNG THANG 'JAM PA'I DBYANGS KYIS, DRANG NGES GSUNG RAB MA LUS 'GAL MED DU, , ZHES SOGS DANG , RJE THAMS CAD MKHYEN PAS BLA MA DBU MA PAR PHUL BA'I CHAB SHOG LAS KYANG ,
The principal thing that a person should put to practice--the essence of all the
high teachings of the Victors--is the three principal paths, or what we call the
"Steps of the Path." This teaching on the Steps of the path to Buddhahood is
the only one where all the high teachings of the Victors have been combined
into a single series of Steps that any given person can put into practice himself.
Such a combination is found in no other separate instruction, open or secret,
in any of the traditions, whether we're talking about the three of the Sakya,
Geluk, and Nyingma, or any other lineage.61
We see this in lines such as the
one written by Gungtang Jampeyang: "Every high teaching, literal or not, and
consistent..."62
The sentiment too is expressed in the epistle that the omniscient
Tsongkapa offered to Lama Umapa:

SEMS DPA' CHEN PO DPAL MAR ME MDZAD YE SHES KYI GDAMS PA BYANG CHUB LAM GYI RIM PA'I MTSAN NYID DANG SNGAGS KYI THEG PA'I LAM GYI RIM PA PHYIN CI MA LOG PAR GTAN LA PHAB PA NYID YA MTSAN PAR MTHONG NAS SLOB MA BKRI BA'I RIM PA RNAMS DE KHO NA'I STENG NAS BYED KYIN YOD, GDAMS NGAG DE YANG GSUNG RAB DGONGS 'GREL GYI BSTAN BCOS MAN NGAG MTHA' DAG LAM GYI RIM PA GCIG TU DRIL NAS STON PAR SNANG BAS 'CHAD SHES PA DANG , NYAN SHES PA GNYIS KYIS BSHAD CING NYAMS SU BLANGS NA MAN 
NGAG CHUNG CHUNG DU MA ZAD GSUNG RAB MTHA' DAG GI GUNG 'GRIG NAS 'ONG BAR SNANG BAS 'KHRID KYI RNAM GRANGS MANG PO STON PA MA BYAS, ZHES GSUNGS PA RED,
I have come to the realization that only the unerring exposition
of the Steps to the paths in both the logical and the secret
traditions contained in the work on the Steps of the path to
Buddhahood imparted by that great being, the glorious
Dipamkara Jnyana, is worthy of such wonder; as such, the steps
along which I am presently leading my own disciples I have
taken only from it. This teaching of Lord Atisha's appears to me
to give the entire contents of the formal commentaries and
private instructions on both the words of the Buddha and later
explanations of them, by combining everything into a single
series of Steps along a path. I feel thus that if people learn to
teach it and to study it, and are thereby able to impart and put
it into practice, they will (despite the relative brevity of the work)
have gone through the entire teachings of the Buddha in their
proper order. For this reason I have not found it necessary to
use a great number of different texts in my teaching work here.63

DE'I PHYIR LAM RIM 'DI 'CHAD NYAN TSAR GCIG BYAS PAS KYANG 'DZAM GLING NA YOD PA'I GSUNG RAB PO TI YONGS RDZOGS KYI SNYING PO BTON NAS 'CHAD NYAN BYAS PA YIN,
Thus we can say that, within just a single teaching session devoted to this
work on the Steps to the path to Buddhahood, the teacher has taught and the
disciples have heard the essence drawn from every single volume of Buddhist
teaching that exists on this entire planet.

DE YANG RGYAL BA'I GSUNG RAB THAMS CAD SDE SNOD GSUM DU 'DU, DE LAM RIM GYI SKYES BU GSUM GYI LAM DU 'DU, DE LAM RIM MDOR BSDUS RE'I NANG DU'ANG CHA TSANG 'DU BAS NA 'JAM MGON TZONG KHA PAS KYANG , GSUNG RAB KUN GYI SNYING PO BSDU BSDU BA, , ZHES SOGS DANG , BSHES GNYEN 'BROM STON PAS,
Now all the teachings of the victorious Buddhas are included into three
collections,64
and all these are included in the teachings on the Steps of the path
to Buddhahood for persons of three different scopes. These teachings
themselves are included, in their entirety, within even any one of the very
briefest works on the Steps of the path. As the gentle protector, Tsongkapa,
has described it himself, "...an abbreviated abbreviation of the pith of all the
Buddhas' words."65
The great guide Drom Tonpa said as well,

,NGO MTSAR BKA' NI SDE SNOD GSUM PO STE,
,GDAMS PA SKYES BU GSUM GYIS MDZES PA YI,
,BKA' GDAMS RIN CHEN GSER GYI PHRENG PA NI,
,'GRO BA GANG GIS BGRANGS KYANG DON YOD YIN,
,ZHES GSUNGS,
His wondrous word is all three the collections,
Advice adorned by teachings of three scopes,
A gold and jewel rosary of the Seers,
Meaningful to all who read its beads.66

DES NA LAM RIM 'DI NI GSUNG RAB GZHAN DANG GZHAN LAS KHYAD CHOS GSUM DANG CHE BA BZHI'I SGO NAS KHYAD PAR DU 'PHAGS PA YIN PAS KHYAD CHOS 'DI LTA BU NI DPAL GSANG BA 'DUS PA DANG BSTAN BCOS MNGON RTOGS RGYAN SOGS LA'ANG MED,
Thus it is that this teaching on the Steps of the path to Buddhahood is far
superior to any other teaching of the Buddha that you might choose, for it
possesses what we call the "three distinguishing features" and the "four
greatnesses."67
The special qualities mentioned above are found not even in
such holy works as the glorious Secret Collection,68
or the classical commentary
known as the Jewel of Realizations.69

'DI LA GO BA LEGS PO ZHIG CHAGS NA TZTSA KHANG NANG GI YI GE SHOG GYAR GCIG TSUN KYANG 
NYAMS SU LEN BYAR GO NUS PAS PHAR GSUNG RAB SGO BRGYA 'BYED PA'I 'PHRUL GYI LDE MIG LTA BU DANG , TSUR GSUNG RAB THAMS CAD 'DIR 'DUS PA YIN,
A person who develops a good understanding of these Steps to the path
reaches a point where he can go to any one of those tsatsa sheds around town
where we dispose of old scriptures and images, pick up any scrap of writing
that he finds there, and know just where it fits into his lifetime practice. When
you go from here to there, meaning from this single teaching on the Steps out
to the mass of the Buddhas' other teachings, the Steps are like a magic key that
opens a hundred different doors. Going from there to here, the total contents
of that mass of teachings has been packed into these Steps.

BSTAN PA YONGS RDZOGS LA GO BA CHAGS PA'ANG DE LTA BU LA BYA BA YIN PAS THUB BSTAN YONGS RDZOGS KYI BDAG PO ZHES PA YANG GSAR RNYING BAN BON GYI GRUB MTHA' YONGS RDZOGS BSRES NAS NYAMS SU LEN PA ZHIG LA MI BYA, DE YIN TE, THU'U BKVAN DHARMA BADZR PA'I ZHAL NAS KYANG , GSAR RNYING THAMS CAD GCIG TU BSRES PAS GNYIS KA'I GRAL DU MI CHUD PA DANG , ZHES GSUNGS PAS KYANG SHES PA YIN,
Having the ability we've just described is, by the way, what we mean when we
say someone has "gained an understanding of the teachings in their entirety."
Therefore too the expression "master of all the Buddhas' teachings" is not at all
meant to refer to somebody who has put together some neither-here-and-
neither-there concoction of all the earlier and later systems, and who is trying
to practice that. This point we get as well from something that Tuken Dharma
Vajra spoke: "Try to mix up all the systems, the earlier and the later, and you
end up outside of both."70

LAM GYI RIM PA 'DIR GSUNG RAB THAMS CAD 'DUS LUGS KYANG SDE SNOD GSUM GYI BRJOD BYA BSDUS NAS BSTAN PAS GSUNG RAB THAMS CAD KYI GNAD 'DUS PA YIN,
When we say here that the entire teachings of the Buddha are packed into the
Steps of the path, what we mean is that every vital point of the teachings has
been expressed through an abbreviated presentation of the topics contained in
the three collections of scripture.

LEM RIM 'DI LHA BLA MA BYANG CHUB 'OD KYIS JO BO LA BSTAN PA SPYI LA PHAN PA'I CHOS SHIG GNANG BAR GSOL BA BTAB PA NA JO BOS BYANG CHUB LAM SGRON GSUNGS TE DE NAS BZUNG LAM GYI RIM PA'I MTSAN GYI THA SNYAD GNANG STE DAR RGYAS SU BYUNG BA LAS, JO BO DANG RJE TZONG KHA PAS GSAR BZO MDZAD PA GTAN MIN PAR DUS GSUM GYI SANGS RGYAS THAMS CAD GSHEGS PA'I GZHUNG LAM YIN TE, SHER PHYIN MDO SDUD PA LAS,
Now about the expression "Steps of the Path"; the royal lama Jangchub Uw
once made a petition to Lord Atisha, asking for an instruction that would be
of special benefit to keep the teachings of the Buddha in the world.71
Lord
Atisha then spoke the Lamp on the Path to Buddhahood, which from that time
onwards he referred to as the "Steps of the Path"--and thus the expression
began to spread. This teaching though is by no means something that Lord
Atisha and the great Tsongkapa invented themselves; rather, it is that grand
highway along which each and every Buddha has travelled. As the shorter
Sutra on the Perfection of Wisdom says it,

,RGYAL BA 'DAS DANG MA BYON DA LTAR GANG BZHUGS PA,
,KUN LAM PHA ROL PHYIN PA 'DI YIN GZHAN MA YIN,
,ZHES GSUNGS, LAM RIM ZHES PA'I MTSAN GYI KHUNGS KYANG 'DI YIN,
It is this perfection, nothing else, which is
the path that's shared
By all the Victors, stay they in the past,
the present, or the future.72
This, by the way, is the ultimate origin of the expression "Steps of the Path."
 DE LTAR NA LAM RIM 'DI BOD SPYI'I CHOS YIN YANG , KHA CIG DGE LDAN PA'I SGER CHOS SU 'DOD DE 'DI LA MI MOS PA NI RANG RANG BSOD NAMS KYI BSAGS RGYAB CHUNG BAS LAN PA RED,
Therefore the teaching on the Steps of the path is one for all Tibet; still though,
some people feel no desire to study it, for they hold it to be a private
instruction of the Geluk tradition. They are not at fault; it is only because they
have insufficient merit from their past deeds that they think this way.

DER MA ZAD SANGS RGYAS THAMS CAD GSHEGS SA'I SHUL LAM DE LA ZHUGS NA SANGS RGYAS THAMS CAD KYIS BRNYES PA'I GO 'PHANG DER SLEBS TE 'ONG , GZHAN DU NA SANGS RGYAS SOGS SNGAR DAM PA RNAMS KYIS MA THOB PA'I SA LAM KHYAD MTSAR ZHIG TU SLEBS PA LAS 'OS MED, RANG CAG LA DE LTA BU'I GOL SAR SHOR DOGS MED PAR LAM GYI RIM PA 'DI LTA BU NYAMS SU LEN BYAR YOD PA NI JO BO DANG RJE TZONG KHA PA CHEN PO'I BKA' DRIN YIN,
And that's not all; it is in fact by stepping on to this path well-worn by all the
Buddhas that one eventually arrives at the very state all Buddhas have found.
Otherwise it doesn't make sense that you'd get anywhere except to some weird
path or level that no Buddha or any other high being of the past has ever
reached. You and I have no need to fear that we might ever make such a
blunder, for we have the Steps of the path for our practice. All this we owe
to the great kindness of Lord Atisha and Lord Tsongkapa.

CHOS SHIG BYED BSAM PA TSOS LAM MA NOR BA 'DI LTA BU LA SLOB DGOS PA LAS KHYI'I KHA ZAS BZHIN DU GANG BYUNG BYUNG BYA BA MI RIGS TE, 'JAM MGON SA PAndI TAS,
People who have hopes of doing some kind of spiritual practice should study
an unerring path such as this one. It's not right just to practice anything you
can get ahold of, like some stray dog that gobbles down anything he can find.
As the gentle protector, the Sakya Pandita, has said:

,RTA DANG NOR BU LA SOGS PA'I,
,CUNG ZAD TZAM GYI NYO TSONG LA,
,KUN LA 'DRI ZHING BRTAG NAS DPYOD,
,TSE 'DI'I BYA BA CUNG ZAD LA'ANG ,
,DE 'DRA'I 'BAD PA BYED PAR MTHONG ,
,SKYE BA GTAN GYI 'DUN MA NI,
,DAM PA'I CHOS LA RAG LAS KYANG ,
,CHOS NI KHYI YI ZAS BZHIN DU,
,BZANG NGAN GANG DU'ANG MI DPYOD PAR,
,GANG 'PHRAD DE LA GUS PAR 'DZIN,
,ZHES GSUNGS,
Even in some insignificant business
Over a horse, a gem, or the like,
You check: ask everyone, consider it well.
We see people taking pains like this over
Even the smallest matters of this life.
Gaining the ultimate goal of all our
Countless lives depends on dharma,
Yet we prize any dharma we might come across,
Not checking if it's good or bad,
And act like dogs with a scrap of food.73

DE YANG DPER NA TSE 'DI'I BYA BA NYO TSONG LTA BU CUNG ZAD RE LA'ANG THABS SNA TSOGS KYIS GZHAN LA'ANG DRIS, RANG GIS KYANG BRTAG DPYAD NAN TAN BYED KYANG , DE JI TZAM 'PHYUG NA'ANG TSE PHYI MAR PHAN GNOD GANG YANG MI 'BYUNG , CHOS NOR BA ZHIG DANG 'PHRAD NA SKYE BA GTAN GYI 'DUN MA 'PHYUG 'GRO ,
That's just how it is--even in every little matter of this present life, like when
you're buying or selling something, you take a lot of care: you do everything
you can think of, you run around and ask other people, you spend a lot of
time thinking over what to do yourself. But no matter how big a mistake you
make with something like this, it's not going to help or hurt you in your future
life at all. If you meet up with a spiritual teaching that's wrong though, you
make a mistake that affects the ultimate goal of all your lives.

SPYIR DBEN PA'I GNAS SU SGRUB PA BYED LO BYAS KYANG GDAMS NGAG TSANG LA MA NOR BA LA NYAMS LEN RDO RUS THUG PA ZHIG BYED PA MED NA, PHAL CHER NGAL BA DON MED NYID LAS MA 'DAS PA YIN TE, RJE MID LAS KYANG ,
Generally speaking a lot of us go off to some deserted place with the notion
that we're going to do some deep practice there. But unless you go with some
instruction in hand that is really complete and totally correct, and unless you
work to dig down to its core, most of what you do won't be much more than
simple wasted effort. As Lord Milarepa once said,

,DON SNYAN BRGYUD KYI GDAMS PA MI BSGOMS NA,
,GNAS RI KHROD BZUNG YANG RANG SDUG YIN,
,ZHES GSUNGS,
The point: if you don't meditate on advices
passed down ear to ear;
The place: you can sit in a mountain cave,
but only to torture yourself.74

SNGAR GYI LO TS'A BA CHEN PO DAG GIS KYANG DKA' SPYAD DU MAS THAG RING RGYA GAR GYI YUL NAS CHOS TSAD LDAN BOD 'DIR GDAN DRANGS PA YANG BOD KYI CHOS LOG DE TSOS GO MA CHOD PA RED, DES NA CHU 'GO'I PHUGS GANGS LA THUG DGOS PA BZHIN DU RANG GIS NYAMS SU LEN BYA'I CHOS KYI THUGS DE YANG MA NOR BA BSTAN PA'I BDAG PO STON PA SANGS RGYAS LA THUG PA ZHIG DGOS,
Now the master translators of old undertook a great many hardships,
journeying afar to the land of India to bear authentic dharma teachings back
here to Tibet. But those in Tibet who followed a mistaken path couldn't live
up to them at all. Really good water should at the end of ends trace back to
some pure snow. Just so, whatever dharma we choose to practice should have
its ultimate origin in something infallible: in the very Lord of the Word, in the
Teacher, in the Buddha.

CHOS KHUNGS MED LA LO STONG DU SGRUB PA BYAS KYANG RTOGS PA TSAD LDAN SNE GCIG MI SKYE STE, MAR 'DOD NAS CHU BSRUB PA DANG 'DRA BA YIN,
You can spend a thousand years struggling to practice some dharma teaching
that has no authentic origin, and you still won't get a single sliver of true
realization. It's like thrashing water to make butter.

DE LTAR NA NYAMS SU LEN BYA'I CHOS DE STON PA SANGS RGYAS KYIS GSUNGS PA, PAndI TAS BAR DU LOG CHOS KYI SKYON ZHUGS MA ZHUGS RTZOD PAS GTAN LA PHAB STE SKYON BSAL BA, GRUB PA'I DBANG PHYUG RNAMS KYIS THOS BSAM SGOM GSUM MDZAD DE RTOGS PA THUGS RGYUD LA 'KHRUNGS, DE NAS RIM GYIS BRGYUD PA BCAS KHYAD CHOS DE GSUM DANG LDAN PA ZHIG DGOS,
Therefore we can say that the teaching we decide to practice should have three
distinguishing features:
1) It should have been taught by the Buddha.
2) It should have been cleaned of any errors: sages must have
brought the teaching to its authentic final form, having
examined it to determine whether any wrong ideas crept
into it after the Buddha taught it.
3) It should have brought true realizations to the hearts of master
practitioners, once they have heard, considered, and
meditated upon it. And then it must have passed to us
through the various generations of an unbroken lineage.

DE BYUNG NA CHOS TSAD LDAN YIN PAS RANG GI SNYING RUS DANG NYAMS LEN GYIS PHAR MA BSLUS NA CHOS KYIS TSUR BSLU DOGS MI DGOS,
If the dharma we seek to practice has these three characteristics, it is authentic.
We from our side still might fail it, through lapses in our effort and daily
practice, but we need never fear that the teaching from its side will fail us.

DE NI LAM RIM 'DI YIN TE, SANGS RGYAS KYI GSUNG RAB KUN GYI RAB DANG MCHOG SHER PHYIN GYI MDO SDE RIN PO CHE YIN LA, DE'I DNGOS BSTAN ZAB MO'I DON RNAMS LAM RIM DU ZAB MO'I LAM GYI RIM PAR BSDUS, SHER MDO'I RGYA CHE BA'I DON RNAMS RGYA CHE BA'I LAM RIM DU BSDUS NAS BSTAN PAS NYAMS SU LEN BYA'I CHOS TSANG LA MA NOR BA NI BYANG CHUB LAM GYI RIM PA 'DI KHO NA YIN PAS CHOS NYAMS LEN ZHIG 'ONG DU RE BA RNAMS KYIS NI NGES PAR LAM RIM 'DI LA 'JUG DGOS,
And that authentic teaching is this very Steps to the path. The highest, the
acme, of everything that the Buddha spoke is the precious collection of
teachings on the perfection of wisdom. The overt subject matter of these
teachings consists of the "instructions on the profound"--on emptiness. These
are included in the Steps within those we call the "profound steps." The
wisdom sutras also present what are known as the "far-reaching" instructions:
those on working to save all living beings. These points are included in the
Steps within those we call the "far-reaching steps." This then is why only the
teaching on the Steps of the path is one both complete and free of error. And
this is why people who are looking for a dharma teaching that is worthy of
their practice should most surely begin the Steps.

'GA' ZHIG PHA MA RIGS RUS SOGS KYI ZHEN KHOG BLOS MTHONGS PAS BON LA SOGS PA'I LOG CHOS KYIS BSLUS PA NI 'DI PHYI'I DON CHEN PO RLUNG LA BSKUR BA RED,
We see a number of people who out of a mistaken loyalty to their family
traditions stick stubbornly to whatever beliefs their parents happened to have
held. They follow the Bon or some similar mistaken path and in the end it
fails them; the whole great purpose of the present life they live, and their
future lives as well, is carried away on the wind.

MKHAS GRUB KHYUNG PO RNAL 'BYOR YANG DANG PO BON YIN, RJES SU BON CHOS KYI KHUNGS PHYIN CI LOG TU GZIGS TE SNGAGS RNYING MA LA ZHUGS, DE LA YANG SKYON YOD PAR MKHYEN NAS RGYA GAR DU PHEBS, SNGAGS GSAR MA LA SBYANGS PA MTHAR PHYIN PA MDZAD DE GRUB PA THOB PA RED, SA CHEN KUN SNYING SOGS GZHAN YANG DE LTAR MDZAD PA MANG DU YOD,
That great accomplished sage, Kyungpo Neljor, was too a follower of Bon in
the beginning.75
Later on he realized that Bon had errant beginnings, and so
he got into the earlier secret traditions. These too, he came to learn, were
faulty--so he travelled to India. Here he studied the later secret traditions and
brought his practice to its desired end, gaining the great accomplishments.
And there were many others as well--the great Sakya lama Kun-nying, for
example--who did the same.76

RGYAL SRAS DAM PA THAMS CAD KYIS BSNGAGS PA BRJOD CING DE RNAMS GANG NAS GSHEGS PA'I LAM BZANG PO MA NOR BA, MA 'KHRUL BA, SKAL BA DANG LDAN PA'I GANG ZAG THAR PA 'DOD PA RNAMS KYI 'JUG NGOGS TE 'JUG PA'I SGO DAM PA, DE LTA BU'I LAM GYI GTZO BO RNAM PA GSUM PO DE JI LTAR NUS BZHIN BDAG GIS BSHAD PAR BYA ZHES GSUNGS,
So now we can put the first verse into perspective. Lord Tsongkapa is saying,
"As far as I am able I'll explain the teaching on the three principal paths. It is
that excellent path that all the Victors' holy sons commend with their praise, the
path on which they travel. It has no error. It goes no mistaken way. It is the
highest of all doorways: it is the entry point for those people of good fortune who
are seeking freedom."

JI LTAR NUS BZHIN ZHES PA NI SPYIR BTANG LA RJE RANG NYID KYIS KHENGS SKYUNGS PA'I TSIG DANG , DON DU 'DIR TSIG NYUNG NGU ZHIG GI NANG DU DON RGYA GANG CHE ZHIG 'CHAD GANG THUB MDZAD CES GSUNGS PA YIN,
The words "as far as I am able" in the verse are in general put there by Lord
Tsongkapa as an expression of modesty. More specifically they have the effect
of saying, "As far as I am able I will explain something of as great meaning as
can be put into the few words here."

YANG NA DE'I 'GREL LUGS GCIG LA RGYAL BA'I GSUNG RAB CES SOGS TSIG RKANG DANG POS NI MTSAN BRJOD LAS,
,THEG PA GSUM GYIS NGES 'BYUNG LA,
,THEG PA GCIG GIS 'BRAS BUR GNAS,
,ZHES PA LTAR   
There is another way of glossing the verse, according to which the first line of
explanation--the one that includes the words "all high teachings of the
Victors"--refers to renunciation. As Chanting the Names says,
The renunciation of all three vehicles
Lies in the end in a single vehicle.77

   SANGS RGYAS KYIS DRANG DON DU THEG PA GSUM GSUNGS PA DE NGES DON MTHAR THUG LA LTOS TE THEG PA GCIG TU GNAS SHING , DE BZHIN DU RGYAL BA'I GSUNG RAB THAMS CAD GDUL BYA'I RGYUD LA MTHAR THUG GI NGES 'BYUNG SKYED PA'I THABS SU GSUNGS PAS, THOG MAR 'KHOR BA LAS YID 'BYUNG NAS THAR PA THOB 'DOD KYI BLO SKYE BA YANG NGES 'BYUNG GIS BSKUL TE SKYE BAS NA 'DIR YANG THOG MAR NGES 'BYUNG GI BSAM PA BSTAN,
The point is that the Buddha, in some of his teachings which should be
interpreted rather than taken literally, said that there were three different
vehicles or ways. These three though are really only one, from the viewpoint
of the ultimate end to which they lead. In a similar sense, all the high
teachings of the Victors were enunciated as a means to produce the ultimate
"renunciation"--the Buddha's knowledge--within the minds of disciples. And
renunciation is what, at the very beginning, urges one to develop a disgust for
the cycle of life and set his mind on reaching freedom. This is why the
attitude of renunciation is taught here first, in the first line.

RGYAL SRAS DAM PA SOGS TSIG RKANG GNYIS PAS NI, RGYAL DANG RGYAL SRAS RNAMS KYIS THUGS DAM GYI MTHIL DU MDZAD CING BSNGAGS PA BRJOD PA, THEG PA CHEN PO'I LAM GYI SROG SHING LTA BU BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS BSTAN,
The second line of explanation--the one that includes the words "their holy
sons"--refers to the wish to achieve enlightenment for every living being. This
is the attitude that all the Victors and their sons take as their single most
important meditation, and the attitude whose praises they sing. It is like a
great center beam that holds up the entire structure of the greater way.

SKAL LDAN THAR 'DOD SOGS TSIG RKANG GSUM PAS NI THAR 'DOD KYI GDUL BYA RNAMS KYI 'JUG NGOGS GCIG PU YANG DAG PA'I LTA BA BSTAN, DE YANG THAR PA THOB PA LA 'KHOR BA'I RTZA BA MA RIG PA GCOD DGOS, DE GCOD PA LA BDAG MED RTOGS PA'I SHES RAB SKYE DGOS, DE SKYE BA LA YANG DAG PA'I LTA BA MA NOR BA ZHIG DGOS,
The third line of explanation--the one with the words "the fortunate seeking
freedom"--refers to correct view. This perception is the one and only entry
point for disciples who seek for freedom. To achieve freedom, you have to cut
ignorance--the root of this circle of life. And to cut ignorance, you have to
develop the wisdom which realizes no-self. And to develop wisdom, you need
a correct view free of all error.

YANG DAG PA'I LTA BA NI ZHI BA MYANG 'DAS THOB PA'I SGO GCIG PU YIN, DE YAN GYIS YANG DAG PA'I LTA BA BCAS LAM GTZO GSUM BSHAD PAR DAM BCA' MDZAD PA YIN, BSHAD PAR DAM BCA' BA 'DIS SLOB DPON DAnd''I DGONGS PA LTAR, GZHUNG DNGOS KYI BRJOD BYA'AM BSHAD BYA'I LAM GYI LUS YONGS SU RDZOGS PA'I NGO BO TSANG MA 'DI'I NANG DU BSDUS NAS GSUNGS PAS NA NGO BO NGES PAR BSTAN PA'ANG YIN GSUNGS,
Correct view is the single door to nirvana, to peace. And so it is that the great
Tsongkapa, in the closing words of the verse, pledges to compose his work on
the three principal paths--which include correct view. His pledge is made in
the way prescribed by Master Dandin:78
he abbreviates within it all the topics
to be treated in the work itself--which here would be to say he includes within
his pledge every essential point in the entire body of the paths to be explained.
In this sense, our Lama concluded, Lord Tsongkapa had in the first verse
already taught us the essence of the paths.

Notes to Reading Four
61. Sakya, Geluk, and Nyingma: Names of three of the lineages that developed
in Tibet for passing on the Buddha's teachings. The Geluk tradition began with
Lord Tsongkapa himself.
62. Every high teaching... Textual source not located. Gungtang Jampeyang
(1762-1823), also known as Gungtang Konchok Tenpay Dronme, was a student
of the first reincarnation of the great Jamyang Shepa (see the Foreword and
entry 27). He is known for his eloquent spiritual poetry and philosophical
works; his incisive comments on the Three Principal Paths have been appended
to the edition of Pabongka Rinpoche's commentary used for the present
translation, and are included in the final section.
63. I have come to the realization... Lord Tsongkapa's letter to his teacher is still
extant; the quoted lines appear on f. 69b (entry 67). The name "Dipamkara
Jnyana" refers to Lord Atisha.
64. the three collections: Three principal divisions of the Buddha's teachings: the
collection of vowed morality (which concerns principally the training on
morality), the collection of sutra (principally the training of concentration), and
the collection of knowledge (the training of wisdom).
65. an abbreviated abbreviation... Again, from the very brief version of Lord
Tsongkapa's Steps on the Path to Buddhahood (f. 56a, entry 63).
66. His wondrous word... Source of quotation not found. See note 49 for the
author's background.
67. three distinguishing features and four greatnesses: The three features that
distinguish the teaching on the Steps from other instructions are that it
includes all the subjects of both the open and secret teachings, is easily put to
practice, and has come down to us through masters of the two great traditions
described in note 195 (Pabongka Rinpoche, entry 47, ff. 48b-50b; Lord
Tsongkapa, entry 61, f. 8b). The four greatnesses of the teaching are that one
comes to realize all the teachings as consistent, one perceives all the scriptures
as personal advice, one easily grasps the true intent of the Buddhas (none other
than the three principal paths), and one automatically avoids the Great Mistake
of disparaging any teaching (Lord Tsongkapa, entry 61, ff. 8b-14b; Pabongka
Rinpoche, entry 47, ff. 41b-48b).

68. the glorious Secret Collection: One of the major secret teachings of the
Buddha (entry 87).
69. Jewel of Realizations: Important text on the perfection of wisdom imparted
to Master Asanga by Loving One; refer to note 46 (entry 44).
70. Try to mix up all the systems... Source of quotation not found. Tuken
Dharma Vajra, also known as Lobsang Chukyi Nyima (1737-1802), was the
third of the Tuken line of spiritual masters and is famed for his work on
comparative Buddhist school systems, as well as for biographies of saints such
as Changkya Rolpay Dorje, said to be the former life of Pabongka Rinpoche
himself (see the Foreword, and also his collected works at entry 52).
71. royal lama Jangchub Uw: 11th Century ruler of the Guge kingdom of western
Tibet, instrumental in bringing Lord Atisha and his teachings to the Land of
Snows.
72. It is this perfection... The wording of the sutra as found in the Tibetan canon
differs slightly, although the intent is the same (f. 206a, entry 84).
73. Even in some insignificant business... Quotation from f. 95a of his famed work
on the three types of vows (entry 2, see also note 53).
74. The point: if you don't meditate... Source of quotation not found. See note 50
for information on its author.
75. the sage Kyungpo Neljor (978-1079): His persistence in seeking the secret
traditions in India and bringing them to Tibet is well documented in the Blue
Annals (pp. 728ff., entry 94). Bon is the shamanistic religion which was
prevalent in Tibet prior to the introduction of Buddhism.
76. Sakya lama Kun-nying (1092-1158): Full name Kunga Nyingpo, son of the
founder of the famed Sakya Monastery in north-central Tibet, and grandfather
of the illustrious Sakya Pandita (see note 53).
77. The renunciation of all three... From a work in the secret teachings devoted
to Gentle Voice (quotation from f. 10a, entry 25).
78. Master Dandin: Refer to the word "essence" back in his verse explained at
note 38.

82
The Asian Classics Institute
Course I: The Principal Teachings of Buddhism
Reading Five
VI. Encouragement to Study

GSUM PA NYAN PAR BSKUL BA NI,
,GANG DAG SRID PA'I BDE LA MA CHAGS SHING ,
,DAL 'BYOR DON YOD BYA PHYIR BRTZON PA YIS,
,RGYAL BA DGYES PA'I LAM LA YID RTON PA'I,
,SKAL LDAN DE DAG DVANG BA'I YID KYIS NYON,
,ZHES PAS BSTAN,
We have now reached the third and final of the preliminaries that lead into the
composition of the text. This one consists of a strong encouragement for the
reader to study the work well, and is contained in the next verse of the root
text:
(2)
Listen with a pure mind, fortunate ones
Who have no craving for the pleasures of life,
And who to make leisure and fortune meaningful strive
To turn their minds to the path which pleases the Victors.

DE YANG GANG DAG SRID PA'I BDE BA LA YID SKAD CIG KYANG MA CHAGS PAR THAR PA THOB 'DOD CAN DAL 'BYOR THOB PA DON YOD BYA PHYIR RTEN LAS SNYING PO LEN PAR 'DOD PA RNAMS KYIS NI LAM LOG DANG , LAM GOL DANG , LAM GYI YAN LAG GAM CHA SHAS TZAM MA YIN PAR SANGS RGYAS KYANG THUGS DGYES PA'I BZHED PA MTHAR THUG LAM MA NOR BA, MA GOL BA, CHA TSANG BA ZHIG LA SLOB DGOS, DE LTA BU'I LAM LA SLOB PAR 'DOD PA'I SLOB MA DE YANG BZHI BRGYA PA LAS,
Here the great Tsongkapa is urging his readers to study the work: "You, you
people who are seeking freedom and have no single moment's craving for the
pleasures of life; you, who want to get the absolute most from the body you've
found, to make your leisure and fortune meaningful; you now are going to have
to train yourself in a path that never errs, a path that never strays, a path that
is whole and complete, the path which pleases even the Buddhas--the one in the
end they advise, a path that is no erring path, a path that is no path that strays,
a path that is more than just some piece or part of a path. And if you want to
train yourself in a path like that, you're going to have to be a student who has
all the requirements of a student; you're going to have to fit the description
from the 400 Verses:

,GZUR GNAS BLO LDAN DON GNYER BA,
,NYAN PO SNOD CES BYA BAR BSHAD,
We call someone a proper vessel for study
Who's unbiased, intelligent, and willing to strive.79

,CES GSUNGS PA LTAR GYI MTSAN NYID DANG LDAN PA'I SLOB MA CHOS LA YID RAB TU RTON PA'I SKAL LDAN GYI GDUL BYA RNAMS KYIS NYAN TSUL 'GAL RKYEN SNOD KYI SKYON GSUM DANG BRAL ZHING , MTHUN RKYEN 'DU SHES DRUG BSTEN PA'I SGO NAS DVANG BA'I YID KYIS NYON ZHES NYAN PAR BSKUL BA'O, ,
And fortunate ones like you, disciples who have turned their minds to the
dharma, are going to have to listen with a pure mind; avoid in your study those
things which are opposed to its success--the three problems of the pot; rely in
your study on those things which are conducive to its success--the six images
for the instruction."80

YANG 'DI'I DON 'GREL TSUL GCIG LA, GANG DAG SRID PA'I BDE LA MA CHAGS SHING , , ZHES PA NGES 'BYUNG DANG , DAL 'BYOR DON YOD SOGS NI BYANG SEMS TE BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS LA BLO SBYANGS NA DAL 'BYOR LA SNYING PO RAB CIG LON PA YIN, RGYAL BA DGYES PA'I SOGS NI LTA BA LA SBYAR DGOS PA LAM GTZO'I GZHUNG NYID LAS,
There is another way of interpreting the verse which says we should regard the
line about those "who have no craving for the pleasures of life" as referring to
renunciation--the first of the three principal paths. The next line, the one
about making your "leisure and fortune meaningful," applies then to the wish
to achieve enlightenment for all living beings, because anyone who's trained
his mind in this attitude has certainly gotten the absolute most from his life of
leisure and fortune. And the final line, the one about the "path which pleases
Victors," relates to correct view since, as the root text itself states later on,

,GANG ZHIG 'KHOR 'DAS CHOS RNAMS THAMS CAD KYI,
,RGYU 'BRAS NAM YANG BSLU BA MED MTHONG ZHING ,
,DMIGS PA'I GTAD SO GANG YIN KUN ZHIG PA,
,DE NI SANGS RGYAS DGYES PA'I LAM LA ZHUGS,
ZHES GSUNGS SO, ,
A person's entered the path that pleases the Buddhas
When for all objects, in the cycle or beyond,
He sees that cause and effect can never fail,
And when for him they lose all solid appearance.

DE DAG GIS NI MCHOD BRJOD DANG , RTZOM PAR DAM BCA', NYAN PAR BSKUL BA RNAMS SONG , LAM RIM CHE 'BRING SOGS LTAR NA RJE BTZUN BLA MA RNAMS LA PHYAG 'TSAL LO, , ZHES PAS CHOS KHUNGS BTZUN PAR BSTAN PA'I PHYIR MDZAD PA PO'I CHE BA DANG , RGYAL BA'I GSUNG RAB NAS, BSHAD PAR BYA, , BAR GYIS CHOS KYI CHE BA DANG , GANG DAG SRID PA'I NAS, YID KYIS NYON, , BAR GYIS NYAN BSHAD JI LTAR BYA BA'I TSUL RNAMS BSTAN PA YIN, BSTAN BCOS SPYI'I LUS DNGOS KYIS GDAMS PA DNGOS KYIS SLOB MA JI LTAR BKRI BA'I RIM PA BSTAN PAS,
This then completes our presentation of the customary preliminaries: the
offering of praise, pledge to compose the work, and encouragement for the
reader to study it well. We can relate what we've said so far to the opening
sections of works such as the greater and medium-length presentations of the
complete Steps to Buddhahood. The line that reads "I bow to all the high and
holy lamas" relates to the first section in these works, known as "demonstrating
the eminence of the author in order to show that the teaching comes from an
authentic source." The lines from "As far as I am able..." up to "...seeking
freedom" correspond to the second section, on the "eminence of the teaching."
The verse that goes from "Listen with a pure mind..." up to "...path which
pleases the Victors" gives us the third section, which is "how to study and
teach" the Steps. The last great section of these presentations is known as "the
instruction itself, by which students can be led along the Steps" to
Buddhahood. This part is contained in what we have called here the "main
body of the text" of Lord Tsongkapa's verses on the three principal paths.
Thus we now move on to the first one of these verses.81

THE FIRST PATH: RENUNCIATION
VII. Why You Need Renunciation

GNYIS PA BSTAN BCOS SPYI'I LUS DNGOS BSHAD PA LA BZHI, NGES 'BYUNG BSHAD PA, BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS BSHAD PA, YANG DAG PA'I LTA BA BSHAD PA, NGES PA RNYED NAS SGRUB PA LA BSKUL BAR GDAMS PA'O, , DANG PO LA GSUM, NGES 'BYUNG BSKYED DGOS PA'I RGYU MTSAN, NGES 'BYUNG BSKYED PA'I TSUL, DE SKYES PA'I TSAD DO, , DANG PO NI,
Our treatment of the main body of the text will break down into four parts: an
explanation of renunciation, an explanation of the wish to achieve
enlightenment for every living being, an explanation of correct view, and some
strong words of encouragement--that the reader should try to recognize the
truth of these instructions and actually go and practice them. The explanation
of renunciation itself will proceed in three sections: reasons why one should try
to develop it, how one goes about developing it, and the point at which we can
say one has succeeded in developing it. The first of these sections is found in
the next verse of Lord Tsongkapa's work:

,RNAM DAG NGES 'BYUNG MED PAR SRID MTSO YI,
,BDE 'BRAS DON GNYER ZHI BA'I THABS MED LA,
,SRID LA BRKAM PA YIS KYANG LUS CAN RNAMS,
,KUN NAS 'CHING PHYIR THOG MAR NGES 'BYUNG BTZAL,
,ZHES PAS BSTAN TE,
(3)
There's no way to end, without pure renunciation,
This striving for pleasant results in the ocean of life.
It's because of their hankering life as well that beings
Are fettered, so seek renunciation first.

RANG CAG 'KHOR BA LAS THAR BAR BYED PA LA THAR 'DOD KYI BLO SKYE DGOS, DE MA SKYES PAR 'KHOR BA'I PHUN TSOGS LA CHAGS NA 'KHOR BA LAS THAR THABS MI 'BYUNG BA,
Now for all of us to escape from the cycle of life, we have to want to escape.
If we never develop the wish to get out, and we get attached to the good
things of this circle of life, then there will never be any way to escape it.

DPER NA BTZON PA BTZON KHANG NAS THAR 'DOD DANG THAR BA'I THABS LA MA 'BAD NA BTZON LAS MI THAR BA BZHIN DU 'KHOR BA LAS THAR BA'I THABS LA MA 'BAD NA 'KHOR BA LAS THAR BA'I DUS MI 'BYUNG ZHING , DE LAS THAR 'DOD KYI BLO SKYES NA NAM ZHIG 'KHOR BA 'DI LAS THAR BA ZHIG 'ONG ,
A prisoner can sit in a jail, but if he never really wants to escape, and never
really attempts an escape, he never will escape. It's the same for us--if we
never try to find some way to escape this cycle of life, the day of our escape
will never arrive. If we work to develop the wish to escape, then surely there
will come a time when we do.

DE LA SNGON DU 'KHOR BAR 'KHOR TSUL SHES DGOS PAS, ZAG BCAS NYER LEN GYI PHUNG PO'I RGYUN YANG NAS YANG DU LEN PA NI 'KHOR BA YIN, 'KHOR BA DER GANG GIS BCINGS NA LAS NYON GYIS BCINGS, GANG DU BCINGS NA NYER LEN GYI PHUNG POR BCINGS PA YIN,
Here first we have to understand just how we spin around in this life-circle.
The "cycle of life" is defined as taking on, again and again, the impure groups
of things that make up a normal suffering being--it is their unbroken stream
from life to life.82
What is it that chains us to this cycle? Our own deeds and
bad thoughts. And to what exactly are we chained? To those impure parts of
our being.

DE LAS THAR BAR BYED PA LA 'KHOR BA MTHA' DAG SDUG BSNGAL GYI RANG BZHIN CAN DU 
MTHONG NAS DE LA SKYO SHAS DANG ZHEN LOG DRAG POS NGES 'BYUNG SKYE DGOS, NGES 'BYUNG RNAM DAG CIG MED NA SRID PA'I BDE 'BRAS DON DU GNYER BA'I BLO MI LDOG PA'I STENG DU, 'DIR BRKAM PA ZHES PA SRED PA'I MING STE SRID PA'I BDE BA LA SRED ZHEN GYI BLO SKYES PA'I DBANG GIS LUS CAN THAMS CAD BCINGS NA, RANG CI'I PHYIR MI BCING STE 'CHING BAR BYED PAS NA PHYIN CHAD 'KHOR BA LAS THAR BAR BYED PA LA THOG MAR NGES 'BYUNG RNAM PAR DAG PA ZHIG BTZAL DGOS PA YIN,
To get free of this cycle of life we must recognize that everything about it is,
by nature, complete suffering. This brings a disgust for it, a loathing for it, and
this then brings renunciation for it. Thus what the verse is saying is: "Without
pure renunciation, there's no way to stop this attitude where one strives for
whatever pleasant results he might get here in life. Moreover, it is precisely by
force of their feelings of attachment and craving for the pleasant things of life
(here 'hankering' is another name for what we usually refer to as 'craving'), that
all beings are fettered. And if all beings are fettered, do you imagine that you
are not? Of course you are. If you want some day to escape this cycle, seek
then, at the very first, a pure attitude of renunciation."

'DI LA SKYES BU CHUNG 'BRING GNYIS KYI LAM 'DU, 'GA' ZHIG GI SEMS LA 'TSANG RGYA BA LA BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS MA GTOGS NGES 'BYUNG BSGOM PA MI DGOS BSAM MKHAN YOD KYANG , NGES 'BYUNG NI THAR PA TZAM THOB PA LA YANG NGES PAR DGOS BAR MA ZAD, DE YANG SHUGS DRAG PO DGOS TE, 'JAM MGON TZONG KHA PA CHEN POS,
This verse by the way incorporates what the works on the Steps to
Buddhahood refer to as the "instructions for those of lesser and of medium
scope." We see some people around with the notion that to reach
enlightenment you only need to practice the wish to achieve Buddhahood for
all living beings--that you don't need to practice renunciation. The truth
though is that, even just to reach a lower nirvana,83
renunciation is an absolute
necessity; in fact, it has to be fierce renunciation. As the great Tsongkapa, our
Protector, has said himself:

BSAM PA 'DI SHA RA BA GSUNG BA LTAR, SING SKYUR LA BTAB PA'I PHYE BZHIN KHA NA PHAR YAM ME BA ZHIG LAS MI 'DUG NA, 'KHOR BA'I RGYU KUN 'BYUNG LA MI 'DOD PAR BLTA BA YANG DE 'DRA ZHIG LAS MI 'ONG , DE LTAR NA SDUG KUN 'GOG PA'I 'GOG PA THAR PA DON DU GNYER BA YANG DE DANG 'DRA, DE'I PHYIR THAR PA'I LAM LA SGRUB PA BYED PAR 'DOD PA YANG TSIG TZAM DU 'GRO ZHING , SEMS CAN GZHAN 'KHOR BAR 'KHYAMS PA'I SDUG BSNGAL MI BZOD PA'I SNYING RJE YANG 'ONG SA MED LA, BLA NA MED PA'I BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS MA BCOS PA YID SKUL BAR BYED NUS PA'I SHUGS CAN YANG MI SKYE BAS, THEG PA CHEN PO YANG TSIG RJES 'BRANGS PA'I GO BA TZAM DU 'GYUR BA YIN NO, ,
About this attitude--it's just the way Sharawa described it.
Suppose it's no stronger in your heart than a thin film of barley
powder spread out on the surface of some homemade beer. Then
your feeling that you want to avoid the cause of the cycle of
life--what we call the "origin"--will be no stronger than that.
Then your aspiration to reach nirvana, where you stop both
suffering and its origin, will be exactly the same way. And then
your wish to practice the path that brings this nirvana will be
nothing but empty words. So too for compassion, the state of
mind where you can no longer bear to see other living beings
wander through the cycle: there's no way you will gain it. Then
finally you will never find a genuine form of the wish to achieve
matchless enlightenment for all living beings, a powerful wish
that can urge you on. And so the "greater way" becomes for you
nothing but some flimsy understanding of the descriptions you
find of it in books.84

ZHES GSUNGS PA LTAR BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS RGYUD LA SKYE BA LA SNGON DU SEMS CAN SDUG BSNGAL GYIS MNAR BA LA MI BZOD PA'I SNYING RJE SKYE DGOS, DE SKYE BA LA RANG STENG DU SBYAR NAS NGES 'BYUNG MA SKYES NA GZHAN STENG DU BSGOM PA'I SNYING RJE SKYE THABS MED, JO 
BO CHEN POS KYANG , BYAMS PA DANG SNYING RJE SBYONG MI SHES PA'I BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA' BOD KYIS SHES GSUNGS NAS BKA' BKYON PA'I TSUL MDZAD PA YANG DON 'DI LA DGONGS PA YIN GSUNGS,
The point here is that, to develop the wish to achieve enlightenment for all
living beings, you must first develop a kind of compassion where you can no
longer bear to see these beings tormented by the sufferings of life. To develop
this, you must develop renunciation over your own situation; there is no way
otherwise you could gain compassion, for it contemplates the situation that
others must face. This too, concluded our Lama, is what Lord Atisha meant
in his gentle rebuke to us Tibetans: "Only in Tibet have they found people with
the wish for enlightenment who haven't yet found love and compassion."85
VIII. Stopping Desire for This Life

GNYIS PA NGES 'BYUNG BSKYED PA'I TSUL LA GNYIS, TSE 'DI'I SNANG SHAS LDOG TSUL DANG , PHYI MA'I SNANG SHAS LDOG TSUL LO, , DANG PO NI,
This brings us to the second section of our explanation of renunciation; that is,
a description of how to develop it. First we'll talk about how to stop desire for
the present life, and then how to stop it for future lives. Stopping desire for
this life is the subject of the next two lines of the root text:

,DAL 'BYOR RNYED DKA' TSE LA LONG MED PA,
,YID LA GOMS PAS TSE 'DI'I SNANG SHAS 
LDOG,CES PAS BSTAN,
(4a)
Leisure and fortune are hard to find, life's not long;
Think it constantly, stop desire for this life.

RANG TSE 'DI LA SU LAS LHAG PA'I LTO GOS SNYAN GRAGS SOGS PHUN SUM TSOGS PA ZHIG BYUNG NA SNYAM DU TSE 'DI'I BDE SKYID DANG KHE GRAGS 'DOD PA 'DI TSE 'DI'I SNANG SHAS RED, CHOS BYED PA LA TSE 'DI'I SNANG SHAS LDOG PA ZHIG DGOS,
What we mean by "desire for this life" is this desire for happiness and fame in
this life--where you say to yourself, "If only I could get more of the good
things of life than anyone in the world--the best food, finest clothes, biggest
name, and all the rest." Anyone who hopes to do some spiritual practice must
stop his desire for this life.

DE LDOG PA LA DAL 'BYOR DON CHE RNYED DKA' DANG 'CHI BA MI RTAG PA GNYIS BSAM NA TSE 'DI'I SNANG SHAS LOG STE TSE 'DI BLOS THONGS PA ZHIG 'ONG , RANG RES DA LTA CHOS MA BYAS NA LTA CI, BYAS KYANG CHOS SU MI 'GRO BA 'DI TSE 'DI'I SNANG SHAS MA LDOG PAS LAN PA YIN, BLO SBYONG ZHEN PA BZHI BRAL LAS KYANG ,
How to stop it? You must contemplate the two Steps known as (1) the "great
importance of this life of leisure and fortune, and the difficulty of finding it,"
as well as (2) our "impermanence, the fact that we must die." These thoughts
then will turn back your desire for this life--in your mind, you will give up
on it. The fact that you and I right now never do any spiritual practice--no,
worse, the fact that we try and what we do is anything but spiritual
practice--is all because of our desire for this life. Free of Four Loves, the mental-
training text, puts it this way:

,TSE 'DI LA ZHEN NA CHOS PA MIN,
,'KHOR BA LA ZHEN NA NGES 'BYUNG MIN,
,ZHES GSUNGS PA RED,
No practitioner, a person who loves this life.
No renunciation, a mind that loves the cycle.86

CHOS DANG CHOS MA YIN PA'I SA MTSAMS DANG , CHOS GSHA' MA YIN MIN TSE 'DI BLOS THONGS MA THONGS LA BYED, CHOS KHA TON BYED PA DANG 'JIG RTEN GNYIS MNYAM DU 'ONG YANG , CHOS TSE 'DI BLOS BTANG BA DANG 'JIG RTEN TSE 'DI LHUR LEN PA GNYIS MNYAM DU MI 'ONG BAS CHOS DANG 'JIG RTEN GNYIS ZUNG 'BREL DU 'ONG THABS MED PA YIN,
The border that separates spiritual practice from what is not, and the border
that separates real spiritual practice from what is not, is this attitude of having
given up on this life. Practice, in the form of reciting some lines, and the
world may somewhere meet; but there is no way that practice in the form of
giving up on this life will ever meet the world, in the form of happily
participating in this life. There is no way you can keep the world, and still
keep your practice.

DE LA DGONGS NAS DGE BSHES 'BROM RIN PO CHES KYANG BTZUN PA ZHIG LA, JO BO BSKOR BA BYED PA YANG GLO BA DGA' STE, DE BAS KYANG CHOS SHIG RANG BYAS NA DGA' ZHES SOGS PHYAG DANG KHA TON DGOM PAS THAMS CAD LA DE LTAR GSUNGS PA NA DES CHOS JI LTAR YIN MA SHES PAR 'O NA CHOS JI LTAR BYA BA ZHUS PAS, TSE 'DI BLOS THONGS SHIG CES LAN GSUM GYI BAR NAN TAN DU GSUNGS PA YIN,
This is what the precious preceptor, Drom Tonpa, had in mind when he said
to a certain monk, "It makes my heart glad, uncle, to see you walking round
this holy place to pay your respects; how much gladder would I be, if you did
something spiritual!" And he went on to say the same thing about making
prostrations, and reciting prayers, and meditating, and everything else. So
finally the monk couldn't decide at all what was supposed to be spiritual
practice and he asked Drom Tonpa, "Well then, how am I supposed to
practice?" And the only answer he got was "Give up on this life!"--repeated
three times, and loud.87

BKA' GDAMS PA'I DGE BSHES ZHANG SNA CHUNG STON PAS, JO BO LA CHOS ZHUS KYANG TSE 
'DI BLOS THONGS, BYAMS SNYING RJE BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS BSGOM BYA BA RE LAS MI GSUNGS BYAS PAS,
Then there was the Seer geshe by the name of Shang Nachung Tonpa, who
once said,
I go to Lord Atisha and ask him for teaching. But all he says to
me is some little sentence like "Give up on this life," or "Practice
love," "Practice compassion," or "Practice the wish to achieve
enlightenment for all living beings."

DE 'BROM GYIS GSAN NAS DE GA JO BO'I GDAMS NGAG GI MTHIL PHYUNG BA YIN PA LA, ZHANG LTA BUS KYANG CHOS ZHU MI MKHYEN PA GSUNGS, RJES SU KHONG GIS KYANG CHOS BYED PA LA TSE 'DI BLOS GTONG BA 'DI RANG GAL CHE GSUNGS PA YIN,
Lord Drom Tonpa overheard this complaint, and remarked that "It's amazing.
He's just been granted the absolute essence of all Lord Atisha's instruction, yet
even someone so great as Shang doesn't comprehend what it is to have a
teaching." And later on in his life, Shang would also say to his students that
"If you want to practice the spiritual life, the most important thing you can do
is give up on this life."88

DE LA RGYAS PAR NA 'JIG RTEN CHOS BRGYAD DANG , DE DAG TSUR BSDU NA TSE 'DIR ZHEN PA'I LTO GOS GTAM GSUM DU 'DU BAS 'DI GSUM BLOS BTANG DGOS,
In a broad sense we can start with what are known as the "eight worldly
thoughts." These then can be shortened into three concerns of this life: food,
clothes, and a big name. These three are what you have to give up on.

'DI GSUM GYI NANG NAS KYANG GTAM 'DI SDUG SHOS YIN TE, MKHAS PA DANG BTZUN PA DANG SGOM CHEN PHAL CHE BAS KYANG LTO LA GYONG BSKUR NAS ME TOG BCUD LEN DANG RDE'U BCUD LEN TZAM GYIS 'TSO BAR BYED, GOS LA GYONG BSKUR NAS SDUG TSAL BEM PO GYON,
SGAL PA BRAG LA SBYAR, BUG SGO 'DAG SBYAR BYAS TE MTSAMS BSNYEN SGRUB LA BZHUGS KYANG , SEMS KYI GTING DE NAS LUNG PA'I MI KUN GYIS NGA MTSAMS PA SGOM CHEN BZANG PO ZHIG RED ZER DU RE BA'I GTAM SNYAN GRAGS 'DOD,
The worst of the three by the way is Big Name. Sages, holy men, great
meditators of the past--even we can say a majority of them--have been able
to live without great food, keeping themselves alive on one of those mystical
practices where all you eat is some tiny pills or the essence of a flower. And
they've been able to live without great clothes too: they sit in deep retreat,
wearing tattered robes covered with dirt--they glue their backs to the wall of
a cave and seal the only entrance. But in the bottom of their hearts they still
crave fame--the Big Name--and they dream that all the local people outside
are talking about what a holy master meditator they are.

MKHAS PA PAndI TA DANG DGE SLONG TSUL KHRIMS RNAM DAG KYANG DE BZHIN DU BSLU BA MANG STE, RJE 'GRO BA'I MGON POS,
,MTSAMS BCAD YA THEM YI GE BRIS,
,MI DANG MI 'PHRAD SGOM CHEN YANG ,
,TSE 'DI'I SGOM CHEN BZANG LO 'DOD,
There have been many, many sages and scholars and monks who were pure
in their moral lives but misled in this same way. As the great Droway Gonpo
has said,
They go into seclusion, post a sign on the door,
See not a soul, these master contemplators who still
Hope in this life they call me the "Great Meditator."89

,CES DANG ,
,RNAM RTOG MI DRAN DGU DRAN 'DIS,
,CI BYED RNAMS LA 'DIS SLEBS PAS,
,DGE SBYOR CI BYAS LO LOR 'CHOR,
,THAMS CAD LO PA'I RTA PAS KHYER,
,DES NA TSE 'DI'I RNAM RTOG LA,
,MDUNG RE 'DEBS DGOS SKYES BU KUN,
,'DI LA MDUNG RE MA THEBS NA,
,MKHAS BTZUN STON SGOM THAMS CAD KYIS,
,NGAN SONG GSUM GYI SGO MI KHEGS,
,ZHES DANG ,
As well as,
And so they fill their minds with hopes and plans,
Thoughts that come in everything they do,
And so their spiritual practice goes to waste,
Spirited away by bandit locals.
Take a spear then, strike it into every
Thought that comes for this life, and remember
Should a single spear not hit the mark
Being a sage, saint, scholar, meditator
Cannot close the door to the three lower realms.

MNGA' RIS PA CHEN POS, RANG GIS BYAS PA'I CHOS THAMS CAD TSE 'DI'I CHE THABS 'DI DON DU GNYER BAR SONG STE, DES RANG GI NGA RGYAL PHRAG DOG ZHE SDANG 'DOD PA RGYAS PAR BYED PA'I KUN 'BYUNG 'KHOR BA'I RGYUR SONG BAS, CHOS BYAS SNYAM TZA NA DES NGAN SONG DU BSKYUR BAS, SDIG PAS NGAN SONG DU SONG BA DANG KHYAD MED, CES GSUNGS PA RED,
The great Ngaripa too has said,
All the spiritual practice you've done has turned into some
ambition for eminence in this life. This then turns into what we
call the "origin"--a cause for more of the cycle; it increases in you
your feelings of pride, and jealousy, dislike for some things and
longing for others. Then what you thought was spiritual practice
actually takes you to the three lower realms. It's no different
than if you'd gone there by doing bad deeds.90

DES NA BSHES SPRINGS LAS,
,'JIG RTEN MKHYEN PA RNYED DANG MA RNYED DANG ,
,BDE DANG MI BDE SNYAN DANG MI SNYAN DANG ,
,BSTOD SMAD CES BGYI 'JIG RTEN CHOS BRGYAD PO,
,BDAG GI YID YUL MIN PAR MGO SNYOMS MDZOD,
,CES DANG , GRUB CHEN GLING RAS PAS KYANG ,
,'KHOR BA RNAM RTOG GI GRONG KHYER NA,
,'JIG RTEN CHOS BRGYAD KYI RO LANGS RGYU,
,DUR KHROD 'JIGS SU RUNG BA ZHIG DE NA GDA',
,BLA MA RO SNYOMS SHIG MDZAD NA DE RU MDZOD,
,CES GSUNGS PA LTAR RNYED BKUR BYUNG NA DGA', MA BYUNG NA MI DGA' BA DANG , BDE BA BYUNG NA DGA', MA BYUNG NA MI DGA' BA, SNYAN GRAGS BYUNG NA DGA', MA BYUNG NA MI DGA' BA, BSTOD RA GTONG MKHAN BYUNG NA DGA', SMAD RA BYED MKHAN BYUNG NA MI 
DGA' BA STE 'DI BRGYAD LA 'JIG RTEN CHOS BRGYAD CES ZER BA YIN, CHOS BYED PA LA 'JIG RTEN CHOS BRGYAD 'DI MGO SNYOMS PA DGOS,
Therefore if we want to do any spiritual practice we must quell the eight
worldly thoughts--we must stand neutral, free of both members of each of its
four pairs. "Eight worldly thoughts" is a name we give to the following eight
emotions:
1) Being happy when we acquire some thing,
2) And unhappy when we don't.
3) Being happy when we feel good,
4) And unhappy when we don't.
5) Being happy when we become well known,
6) And unhappy when we don't.
7) Being happy when someone speaks well of us,
8) And unhappy when someone speaks ill of us.
As the Letter to a Friend states,
Oh worldly wise! To gain or not, feel good
Or not, be well-known or not, be spoken of
Well or ill, these are the eight worldly thoughts.
Quell them; let them not come to your mind.91
The great saint Lingrepa has said as well,
In the city of daily concerns in our circle of life
Scurry the waked cadavers of eight worldly thoughts.
This is where you can find the most frightening
cemetery of all;
This is where you lamas should keep your midnight
vigil among the dead.92

MKHAS BTZUN STON SGOM SU YIN YANG 'JIG RTEN CHOS BRGYAD DANG 'DRES TE CHOS ZAB ZAB MO JI 'DRA ZHIG BYED KHUL BYAS KYANG SNYING PO MED DE, RGYAL BA RGOD TSANG PA'I SLOB MA YANG DGON PA'I ZHAL NAS,
It doesn't matter who you are--some great sage, or saint, or master, or
meditator--and no matter how profound the practice you imagine you are
doing, it is all a hollow sham if it's mixed up with the eight worldly thoughts.
We find this truth in the words of Yang Gonpa, a disciple of the victorious Gu-
tsangpa:

CHOS RDZOGS PA CHEN PO YIN PAS MI PHAN, GANG ZAG RDZOGS PA CHEN POR 'GRO DGOS, CHOS SKAD LA RTA RI BA MANG PO BYAS NAS GANG ZAG LA KHYI MI RI BA MANG PO MTHONG , CHOS TSIG RKYANG DU SONG NAS LAG LEN LA MI 'DEBS PA DE NE TZO'I 'DON PA DANG KHYAD MED, SEMS DANG CHOS KYI PHYE CHU MA 'DRES PAR CHOS DANG GANG ZAG GI BAR NA HAR BA MI SHONG BA TZAM BYAS, CHOS GLO BA'I TSOD MA BZHIN KHA LA CA LE BYAS PA DES CHOS KYI DGOS DON MA 'GRUB PA LAGS MOD, NGAS NI TSE BLOS GTONG BA LA SGRUB BA'I MTHIL DU BYAS PA YIN NO SKYES BU KUN, ZHES GSUNGS PA LTAR YIN,
It doesn't do any good that the teaching is the holy and secret
"Great Completion." The person himself has to become holy and
secret, great complete. We see a whole pack of cases where the
way a person describes his spiritual practice, it would buy a
whole herd of horses--but the person himself isn't worth a dog.
Religion that's all words and never gets put into daily practice is
all the same as some talk a parrot's been taught to squawk; the
person and the practice are miles apart; his mind and his religion
never quite mix into one, there's lumps of flour that never
dissolve in the batter. Babbling on about spiritual practice and
never letting it sink in, leaving it to bob around on the surface
like some uncooperative vegetables in a soup, is missing the
whole point of spiritual practice. I tell you all, what I teach as
the crux of all practice is to give up on this life.93

DE'I PHYIR TSE 'DI'I CHOS BRGYAD BLOS MA THONGS NA CHOS 'ONG RGYU PHAR BZHAG, NGAN SONG GI SKYE SGO TZAM YANG KHEGS PAR DKA', CHOS BYED PA LA 'JIG RTEN CHOS BRGYAD MGO 
SNYOMS, TSE BLOS GTONG BA'I MAN NGAG BKA' GDAMS PHUGS NOR BCU NYAMS SU LEN DGOS, PHUGS NOR BCU ZHES PA GTAD PA BZHI, RDO RJE GSUM, BUD SNYEGS THOB GSUM STE BCU YIN,
Therefore if a person fails to stand free of the eight worldly thoughts for this
life he will find it hard even to shut the doors to a birth in the realms of
misery, much less do something that's a spiritual practice. To do such a
practice, you must take up the instruction called the "Ten Ultimate Riches"--a
teaching of the masters called the Seers of the Word for quelling the eight
worldly thoughts, and giving up on life. These ten "ultimate riches" are the
following:94
The Four Aims.
The Three Diamonds.
The Three of Being Thrown Out,
and Reaching, and Attaining.

GTAD PA BZHI NI, BLO PHUGS CHOS LA GTAD, CHOS PHUGS SPRANG LA GTAD, SPRANG PHUGS SHI LA GTAD, SHI PHUGS GROG PO SKAM PO LA GTAD PA DANG BZHI,
The "four aims" are,
Aiming your mind ultimately to practice.
Aiming your practice ultimately to the beggar.
Aiming the beggar ultimately to death.
Aiming death ultimately to some dusty ravine.

RDO RJE GSUM NI, THEBS MED RDO RJE SNGON LA BTANG , KHREL MED RDO RJE RJES LA 
BZHAG,YE SHES RDO RJE RANG DANG 'GROGS PA DANG GSUM,
And the "three diamonds" are,
Sending the uncatchable diamond ahead of you.
Laying the unabashable diamond behind you.
Keeping the wisdom diamond at your side.

BUD SNYEGS THOB GSUM NI, MI GRAL NAS BUD, KHYI GRAL BSNYEGS, LHA GRAL THOB PA STE GSUM MO, ,
The three of "being thrown out, and reaching, and attaining," are, lastly,
Being thrown out from the ranks of men.
Reaching the ranks of dogs.
Attaining the ranks of the gods.

DE YANG BLO PHUGS CHOS LA GTAD PA NI, DA RES RNYED DKA' DON CHE'I DAL 'BYOR GYI RTEN BZANG PO LAN GCIG TZAM RNYED PA 'DI YUN RING POR MI GNAS PAR 'CHI BAR NGES SHING NAM 'CHI CHA MED PA DANG , 'CHI BA'I TSE YANG DAM PA'I CHOS KHO NA MA GTOGS TSE 'DI'I RNYED BKUR SNYAN GRAGS SOGS DPAL 'BYOR LONGS SPYOD JI TZAM YOD KYANG CUNG ZAD TZAM YANG MI PHAN PAR BSAMS NAS CHOS BYED PA YIN,
"Aiming your mind ultimately to practice" means to practice religion with the
following thoughts: This time I've been able to obtain a good human body and
circumstances; they are extremely hard to find, they are incredibly valuable,
and they include all the necessary leisure and fortune. This is the one and only
time I will have such a life. And it will not be here long; it is absolutely sure
that I will die, I have no way of knowing when my death will come. And
when I die, only this holy spiritual practice will be of any use to me. All the
things and honors I have gathered in this life, every bit of fame I've gained,
everything else of the money and possessions I may have with me, will not be
the slightest help to me.

CHOS PHUGS SPRANG LA GTAD PA NI, 'O NA TSE 'DI'I BDE THABS MA BSGRUBS PAR CHOS BYAS NA CHOS KYI MTHUN RKYEN TZAM YANG MED PAR SPRANG PO BYAS MI YONG NGAM SNYAM NA, NGAS CHOS KYI PHYIR DU DKA' BA SPYAD NAS SPRANG PO BYAS NA'ANG BYAS, ZAS GOS NGAN NGON SLONG MO BRGYAB PA TZAM GYIS 'TSO BAR BYAS NAS CHOS SGRUB NUS PAR BYED SNYAM PA'O, ,
"Aiming your practice ultimately to the beggar" is like this: Suppose you think to
yourself "But well now, if I stop trying to do what it takes to live well in this
life so I can do my spiritual practice, I'm afraid that I won't even find the bare
necessities for doing the practice: I'll become a beggar." Think then to yourself
this way: "I will undertake any hardship for my practice; and if it means I have
to become a mere beggar, then let me become a beggar. I will find a way to
do my practice, even if I have to live on lousy scraps of food that I beg off
others, and wear any old clothes they give me."

SPRANG PHUGS SHI LA GTAD BA NI, NGAS CA LAG PHRAN BU MA BSAGS PAR DE LTAR SPRANG PO BYAS TE CHOS SGRUB KHUL BGYIS NA MI TSE YANG 'KHYOL THABS MI 'DUG, LTO GOS MED PAR SHI YONG SNYAM PA BYUNG NA, NGAS TSE RABS SNGA MA MANG POR CHOS KYI DON DU SROG GTONG MA MYONG BA LA, DA RES CHOS BSGRUBS NAS SHI THUB NA GO BCAD, LAR NAS PHYUG PO DANG SPRANG PO TSANG MA 'CHI RGYU YIN PA 'DRA BA LA, PHYUG PO YONG RGYU'I DON DU SDIG BSAGS NAS 'CHI BA LAS, CHOS LA DKA' BA SPYAD NAS 'CHI RGYU BYUNG NA DON CHEN PO GRUB PAS NA, CHOS KYI PHYIR DU 'KHYAG RIS SHI NA'ANG SHI , LTOGS RIS SHI NA'ANG SHI SNYAM DU CHOS BLOS MI GTONG BA YIN,
"Aiming the beggar ultimately to death" means never giving up on your practice.
Suppose you think to yourself, "So I try to do some practice, and I turn into a
beggar, because I haven't taken the time to collect even the single smallest
material thing. But then I won't even have what it takes to sustain this human
life. I'm afraid some day I'll die, without enough food, without enough
clothes." But instead you should think this way: "In all my many previous
lives, I've never given up my life for the sake of my practice. If I can die this
one time trying to practice, I might make up for it. And anyway we are all the
same: rich or poor, we all are going to die. Rich people, to get rich, have
collected a lot of bad deeds and will die with them. I, on the other hand, will
accomplish something of very great meaning if I die from the hardships of
trying to practice. So if for my practice I freeze to death, let me freeze. If for
this I starve, let me starve."

SHI PHUGS GROG PO SKAM PO LA GTAD PA NI, RANG LA YO BYAD GTAN NAS MED NA, RANG NA BA DANG , RGAS PA DANG , 'CHI DUS TSUN CHAD LA G-YOG BYED MKHAN DANG , RO SKYEL BYED TSUN CHAD DGOS SNYAM PA YANG TSE 'DI'I PHUN TSOGS LA ZHEN PA YIN, RANG NYID LO RGAS RGAS BAR DU TSE RING POR SDOD PA'I NGES PA GTAN NAS MED PAS, DE BAS CHOS BSGRUBS NAS RANG LA BLTA MKHAN MED PAR GROG PO SKAM PO'I NANG DU KHYI SHI BA LTAR RO LA 'BU BRGYAB KYANG RUNG SNYAM DU GANG LA'ANG MA CHAGS PAR DBEN PA'I RI KHROD DU CHOS SGRUB PA YIN,
"Aiming your death ultimately to some dusty ravine" comes like this: Suppose you
think to yourself, "But there are certain things that I need from now up to the
time I die. If I don't have any money at all, how am I going to get someone
to help me when I'm sick? Who will attend me in my old age? Who will be
there at my deathbed? And who will take care of things after I die--who will
take the body away, and all the rest?" All these kinds of thoughts come under
the category of attachment to the good things of this life. There's no way at
all you can be sure that you'll even live long enough to reach any old age.
Better to go to some lonely mountain retreat, and give up attachment to
anything at all, and think to yourself "Now I'm going to practice, and I don't
care if I die like some stray dog in a dusty ravine, with no one to look after
me, and maggots crawling all over the corpse."

THEBS MED RDO RJE SNGON LA BTANG BA NI, RANG GIS DE LTAR BLOS BTANG NAS CHOS SGRUB PA LA, PHA MA NYE 'BREL MDZA' GROGS LA SOGS PAS JI TZAM BSHOL BTAB KYANG BSHOL THEBS MI THUB PAR GNYEN BSHES BRTZE GDUNG CHE BA SNYING DANG 'DRA BA RNAMS MYA NGAN DANG BCAS BZHIN MIG MCHI MA TZA RE LUS KYANG YID RDO RJE LTAR MI 'GYUR BAS GDUNG SEMS DANG CHAGS SEMS MED PAR DBEN PA'I RI KHROD DU SONG NAS CHOS RNAM DAG BYED PA ZHIG DGOS,
"Sending the uncatchable diamond ahead of you" has this meaning: You may be
able to give up on life as described above, and start to try your practice. But
then your parents and other family, your friends and all the rest will try to
catch you and bring you back. Make yourself uncatchable; keep your mind as
firm and unchanging as a diamond, even if you have to leave behind your
most beloved family and friends, those close to you as the heart in your breast,
standing with tears in their eyes from the pain. Leave, go to some lonely
mountain hermitage, without any regrets, without any attachments. Stay there
and devote yourself to the purest of practice.

KHREL MED RDO RJE RJES LA BZHAG PA NI, TSE BLOS BTANG NAS 'GRO BA NA, MI TSOS KHO SPRANG 'KHYAMS THA CHAD RED ZER BA SOGS ZHE KHREL 'PHYA SMOD GANG 'DRA ZHIG BYAS KYANG , BZANG PO LHA LTA BU RED ZER NA'ANG ZER, NGAN PA 'DRE LTA BU RED ZER NA'ANG ZER, NGA LA KHYAD MED, TSE 'DI PA'I MDZA' BSHES KYI NGO BSRUNG BYED PA NI NYES PA MANG PO'I 'BYUNG GNAS, CHOS SGRUB PA'I BAR CHAD YIN SNYAM DU BLOS BTANG BA ZHIG DGOS,
"Laying the unabashable diamond behind you" looks like this: Suppose you do give
up on this life, and leave. People will despise you, and condemn you, and say
things like "Now he's nothing but a useless wandering beggar." But whatever
they say you must give up on all of it, and think to yourself, "If they say I'm
as pure as a god, that's fine. If they say I'm as evil as a devil, that's fine too.
It doesn't make any difference to me. Trying to keep up a good image with
friends who are all devoted to this life can lead to a great many problems, and
acts as a great obstacle to spiritual practice."

YE SHES RDO RJE RANG DANG 'GROGS PA NI, JI LTAR BRTZAMS PA'I DAM BCA' LAS NAM YANG MI 'DA' BAR SNYING PO MED PA'I 'DI SNANG GI BYA BZHAG THAMS CAD GTAN DU SPANGS TE, CHOS KYI BSAM PA BRTAN POS TSE DANG SGRUB PA SNYOMS PAR BYED PA YIN,
"Keeping the wisdom diamond at your side" means never transgressing the pledge
you have made to yourself. Abandon, and abandon forever, all the absolutely
meaningless actions you do out of desire for this life. Keep your mind in the
spiritual, firmly, and make your life and your practice one and the same.

MI GRAL NAS BUD PA NI, 'DI SNANG GI PHUN TSOGS LA DGRAR BLTAS NAS TSE 'DI DON GNYER CAN GYI MTHO DMAN SU DANG YANG SNANG BA MI BSTUN PAR SMYON PA'I SPYOD PA LTAR TSE 'DI PA'I MI'I GRAL NAS BUD PA YIN,
"Being thrown out from the ranks of men" comes like this: Now you will start to
see that desiring the good things of this present life is your real enemy. Your
whole outlook then will start to clash with the outlook that other men have,
men high or low, who all nonetheless strive for this life's happiness. To them
you are acting like a madman, and so you will be thrown out from the ranks
of men--men who live for this life.

KHYI GRAL SNYEGS PA NI, LTO GOS GTAM GSUM LA GYONG BSKUR, CHOS KYI PHYIR DU BKRES SKOM NGAL DUB JI TZAM BYUNG YANG BSRAN BZOD PAR BYED PA DE RED,
"Reaching the ranks of dogs" means that you live your life without any great
food, or clothes, or reputation. For the sake of your practice, you endure
whatever comes to you in the way of hunger, or thirst, or tiredness.

LHA GRAL THOB PA NI, DBEN PA'I GNAS SU 'JIG RTEN GYI BYA BZHAG THAMS CAD BLOS BTANG STE SGRUB PA MTHAR BSKYEL BA NA LHA YI YANG LHA SANGS RGYAS KYI GO 'PHANG TSE 'DI LA THOB PA YIN,
"Attaining the ranks of the gods" starts with going to some secluded place, and
giving up on all the normal activities of the world. You bring your practice to
its desired end, and within this very life attain the state of a Buddha--the very
god of gods.

DE LTAR BLOS BTANG NAS CHOS SGRUB NA SPRANG POR SONG STE MU GES SHI YONG BA'I DOGS PA BYA MI DGOS, 'JIG RTEN PA LTOGS NAS SHI BA SRID KYANG CHOS PA LTOGS RIS SHI BA GTAN NAS MI SRID DE, STON PA THUGS RJE CAN MNGON PAR RDZOGS PAR SANGS RGYAS PA'I 
TSE 'KHOR SGYUR DRUG KHRI'I SKYE BA BZHES RGYU'I BSOD NAMS LHAG POR LUS PA RNAMS STON PA'I RJES 'JUG RNAMS KYI 'TSO BA'I MTHUN RKYEN DU BSNGOS PA DANG , SNYING RJE PAD DKAR DU,
By the way, you need never fear that if you give up on things to practice the
way we've described it above you'll become some poor beggar and starve to
death. It is possible for a worldly person to die of hunger, but absolutely
impossible for a religious practitioner to do so. This is because our
compassionate Teacher, when he reached the state of total enlightenment, still
had merit enough from his past deeds to go and take some 60,000 births as a
"Wheel Emperor"--one of those incredibly powerful beings who rule the entire
world. Instead he took the fantastic power of these deeds and dedicated it to
the food and other necessities that all his future followers might require. In the
White Lotus, the Sutra on Compassion, we hear the following oath from the
Buddha as he first commits himself to reaching enlightenment for the sake of
living kind:

SANGS RGYAS KYIS THUGS BSKYED PA'I SKABS SU, NGA'I BSTAN PA LA CHOS GOS NGUR SMRIG SOR BZHI 'CHANG BA LA YANG BZA' BTUNG BSAM PA BZHIN MA BYUNG NA, BDAG GIS SANGS RGYAS BSLUS PAS SANGS RGYAS MI THOB PAR GYUR CIG, CES GSUNGS PA DANG ,
And in the days when my teachings spread in the world, any
man who wears so much as four inches of the saffron robe shall
find food and drink to his heart's desire. If he does not, then I
shall have cheated the state of Buddhahood. And then may I
lose my Buddhahood.95

MA 'ONGS PA NA 'JIG RTEN NA MU GE BYUNG STE MU TIG BRE GANG DANG RTZAM PA BRE GANG BRJE DGOS PA'I DUS BYUNG YANG STON PA'I RJES 'JUG RNAMS 'TSO BAS MI PHONGS PAR GSUNGS PA DANG ,
The Buddha also says,
In future days, there will come in the world a time of famine,
when men must pay a box of pearls to buy a box of flour. Not
even in such days will a follower of the Teacher ever want for
life's necessities.96

,KHYIM PA'I SKYE BO THAMS CAD KUN,
,SEN MO'I STENG DU ZHING RMOS KYANG ,
,NGA YI RAB TU BYUNG BA RNAMS,
,'TSO BAS PHONGS PAR MI 'GYUR RO,
,ZHES TSAD MA'I BKA' SLU BA MED PAS MDO SDE SOGS LAS GSUNGS,
And finally Lord Buddha has stated,
Householders, each and every one,
May plow their crops on a fingernail,
But those who've left their homes for me
Will never want for necessities.
These quotations are taken from the collection of sutras and the like; they are
the words of a being who cannot lie, and whose words can never fail.

TSE BLOS GTONG ZHES PA'I BLOS GTONG RGYU'I GTZO BO 'DI SNANG CHOS BRGYAD KYI ZHEN PA DE BLOS THONG BA DGOS, DE THONGS NA YO BYAD THAMS CAD GTOR NAS SPRANG PO BYED PA ZHIG NGES PAR MI DGOS TE, DAM PA TSOS TSE BLOS THONGS PA'I TSAD LA RGYAL MCHOG BSKAL BZANG RGYA MTSO DANG , PAn CHEN BLO BZANG YE SHES SOGS 'JOG PAR MDZAD PA YIN,
Now when we say to "give up on this life," the main thing that you have to
give up is those eight worldly thoughts or attachments, towards the pleasures
of this life. Giving up these thoughts doesn't necessarily mean that you have
to throw away all your material possessions and become a beggar. Holy
teachers of the past have pointed out for us examples of people who succeeded
in giving up on life, and these have included personages of fantastic material
wealth such as Gyalchok Kelsang Gyatso and the Panchen Lobsang Yeshe.97

GZHAN YANG BDAG CAG GI STON PA THUGS RJE CAN GYIS 'KHOR SGYUR GYI RGYAL SRID SPANGS TE RAB TU BYUNG BA DANG , RGYAL SRAS ZHI BA LHA DANG , JO BO CHEN PO DPAL LDAN AA TI SHA 
SOGS KYANG RGYAL SRID SPANGS TE RAB TU BYUNG , RJE TZONG KHA PA CHEN POS KYANG SLOB MA SDE SNOD 'DZIN PA STONG PHRAG LA NYE BA SOGS MIG MCHI MA DZAR RE BZHAG STE 'JAM DBYANGS KYI BKA' BZHIN 'KHOR DAG PA RNAM BRGYAD TZAM LAS MED PAR BYA BRAL LA GSHEGS PA DANG , DE DUS KYI RGYA NAG GONG MAS GSER YIG PA DANG T'A ZHIN SOGS CHED DU BRDZANGS TE GDAN 'DREN ZHUS KYANG GDAN MA 'DRONGS PA DANG ,
Then too there is our own Teacher, the compassionate Buddha, who could
have had the kingdom of a World Emperor, but gave it up and left the home
life. The princes Shantideva and the Great Lord, the glorious Atisha, also
relinquished their thrones and left the home.98
The mighty Lord Tsongkapa as
well, acting on the instructions of Gentle Voice, left behind close to a thousand
learned students with tears in their eyes, and everything else he had, to go into
isolation with but a few hand-picked disciples: the followers known as the
"Purest Eight." The Emperor of China in those days even dispatched a letter
with his golden seal, carried forth by a Tashin and other high officials, inviting
Lord Tsongkapa to the imperial court--but could not induce him to come.99

DAM PA DE DAG GIS 'TSO BA DKA' THUB DANG BSOD SNYOMS TZAM LA BRTEN, SGRUB PA LHUR MDZAD PA SOGS KYANG JO BO BKA' GDAMS PA'I PHUGS NOR BCU'I DON PHYAG BZHES SU MDZAD PA RED,
These high beings lived only off their own asceticism and whatever food
someone might offer them. They spent their days striving to perfect their
practice, and in such activities led a way of life that followed the real meaning
of the Ten Ultimate Riches--the teaching of Lord Atisha and the Seers of the
Word.

DER MA ZAD, TSE GCIG LUS GCIG LA SANGS RGYAS PA RGYAL BA DBEN SA PA CHEN PO'I ZHAL NAS,
,SNGON DUS KYI MID LA RAS PA DANG ,
,DA DUS KYI BLO BZANG DON GRUB LA,
,'PHRAL CHAS KYI ZAS GOS MA GTOGS PA,
,NOR DNGOS PO 'DZIN PAS DGOS PA MED,
,TSE GCIG LA SANGS RGYAS BSGRUB PA LA,
,DE 'DRA'I SPYOD LA LEGS GNAS NAS,
,CHAGS SDANG SPANGS PA'I DBEN GNAS SU,
,DAL 'BYOR LA SNYING PO LEN PAR 
SHOG,CES DANG ,
Many are the holy songs of experience from those who have given up this life.
The great victor Wensapa, who achieved Buddhahood in this one human life,
in this one man's body, spoke the following:
Milarepa, of days gone by,
And Lobsang Dundrup in our times
Had no need for keeping a single thing
Beyond today's food and the clothes they wore.
Make the most of your leisure and fortune:
In isolation, from like and dislike;
Live life well, follow this way,
Reach enlightenment in this one life.100

RNAL 'BYOR GYI DBANG PHYUG MID LA'I ZHAL NAS KYANG ,
,BU SNYING NAS LHA CHOS BYA BSAMS NA,
,DAD PA ZHIG GTING NAS SKYES PA NA,
,TSE 'DI LA PHYI MIG MI LTA NA,
,BDEN PAR NGA PHYIR 'BRANG BA NA,
,GNYEN 'DUN BDUD KYI BSHOL 'DEBS YIN,
,BDEN NO MA SNYAM 'KHRI BA CHOD,
,ZAS NOR BDUD KYI SO PA YIN,
,'DRIS SHING NGAN NO 'DZIN CHAGS SPONGS,
,'DOD YON BDUD KYI ZHAGS PA YIN,
,'CHING BAR NGES SO ZHEN PA THONGS,
,GZHON GROGS BDUD KYI BU MO YIN,
,SLU BAR NGES SO KHONG ZON GYIS,
,PHA YUL BDUD KYI BTZON RA YIN,
,THAR BAR DKA' YIS MYUR DU BROS,
,LAR THAMS CAD BZHAG NAS 'GRO DGOS NA,
,DUS DA LTA BZHAG NA DON CAN LAGS,
,SGYU LUS KYI THO YOR CIS KYANG 'GYEL,
,DUS DA LTA RTEN 'BREL BSGRIGS NA LEGS,
,SEMS KYI BYA RGOD CIS KYANG 'PHUR,
,DUS DA LTA NAM DPANGS BCAD NA LEGS,
,MI NGA ZER DE TSO NYAN SPYOD NA,
,BU KHYOD LA LHA CHOS KYI SKAL BA YOD,
,CES DANG ,
The great master of all master meditators, Milarepa, has said as well:
If in your heart you wish to keep the holy
practice, son,
Within the very depths of it then find
this thing first--faith,
Never turn and look back once again
upon--this life.
If in truth you'll follow after me,
Your loved ones turn to demons, hold you back;
Do not think them true--cut all the ties.
Food and money are the demons' advance guard;
The closer the worse, give up all want for them.
The objects of the senses are the demons' snare;
"They will entrap me!" stop your craving them.
Your young love is the daughter of the demons;
"She will mislead me!" so be on your guard.
The place you grew up is the demons' prison;
Hard to free yourself from, flee it quick.
You will have to leave it all behind and
go on--later,
Why not make it meaningful and leave it
all--right now?
It will fall down one day anyway, this
mannequin apparition;
Better to use this body now, get off to a
good quick start.
This skittish bird of mind will anyway fly
from the corpse one day;
Better now to soar across some wide
expanse of sky.
If you listen and act upon this one man's
words--of mine,
Then the grace to keep the holy practice,
my boy--is yours.101

,NGA SKYID PA GNYEN GYIS MTSOR ZHING ,
,SDUG PA DGRA YIS MA TSOR BAR,
,RGAS PA GROGS KYIS MA TSOR ZHING ,
,NA BA SRING MOS MA TSOR BAR,
,RI KHROD 'DI RU 'CHI NUS NA,
,RNAL 'BYOR BSAM PA RDZOGS PA YIN,
,SHI BA MI YIS MA TSOR ZHING ,
,RO RUL BYA YIS MA MTHONG BAR,
,RI KHROD 'DI RU 'CHI NUS NA,
,RNAL 'BYOR BSAM PA RDZOGS PA YIN,
,SHA RUS SBRANG MAS 'JIB PA DANG ,
,RTZA RGYUS 'BU YIS ZA BA RU,
,RI KHROD 'DI RU 'CHI NUS NA,
,RNAL 'BYOR BSAM PA RDZOGS PA YIN,
,NGA SGO NA MI RJES MED PA DANG ,
,NANG NA KHRAG RJES MED PA RU,
,RI KHROD 'DI RU 'CHI NUS NA,
,RNAL 'BYOR BSAM PA RDZOGS PA YIN,
,RO LA 'KHOR MI MED PA DANG ,
,SHI NA DU MI MED PA RU,
,RI KHROD 'DI RU 'CHI NUS NA,
,RNAL 'BYOR BSAM PA RDZOGS PA YIN,
,NGA GAR SONG 'DRI MI MED PA DANG ,
,'DIR SONG GTAD SO MED PA RU,
,RI KHROD 'DI RU 'CHI NUS NA,
,RNAL 'BYOR BSAM PA RDZOGS PA YIN,
,MI MED LUNG PA'I BRAG PHUG TU,
,SPRANG PO SHI BA'I SMON LAM 'DI,
,'GRO BA'I DON DU THEBS PAR 
SHOG,THEBS NA BSAM PA RDZOGS PA YIN, , ZHES GSUNGS PA RED, 'DI DAG KYANG TSE BLOS BTANG BA'I GSUNG MGUR YIN,
He said too,
No way my loved ones know I'm glad,
No way my enemies know I'm sad;
If I can die here in this cave
My hermit's wishes have come true.
No way my friends know I've got old,
No way my sister knows I'm sick;
If I can die here in this cave
My hermit's wishes have come true.
No way that people know I've died,
No rotting corpse that vultures spy;
If I can die here in this cave
My hermit's wishes have come true.
Flies will suck my meat and bones,
Maggots eat tendons, ligament;
If I can die here in this cave
My hermit's wishes have come true.
No footprints leading from my door,
No bloodstains left here on the floor;
If I can die here in this cave
My hermit's wishes have come true.
No one to hold a deathbed vigil,
No one to weep when I am gone;
If I can die here in this cave
My hermit's wishes have come true.
No one to wonder where I went
No one who knows where I am found;
If I can die here in this cave
My hermit's wishes have come true.
May this death prayer of a beggar
In the wild of a mountain cave
Come to help all living beings;
Then my wishes have come true.102

'DI SNANG GI CHOS BRGYAD BLOS GTONG BA'I MAN NGAG GI SNYING PO LTA BU NI 'CHI BA MI RTAG PA BSGOM PA NYID YIN KYANG , RANG CAG GIS DANG POR DAL 'BYOR DON CHEN RNYED DKA' NAS RIM GYIS BLO SBYANG NA GNAD DU SMIN PA YONG ,
Now there is one instruction which we can call the very essence of all the
teachings on how to get rid of the eight worldly thoughts of this life. This is
the meditation on one's own impermanence and death. People like us though
must prepare our minds for this meditation by first contemplating how
valuable, and how hard to find, our present life of leisure and fortune is. Then
gradually we will be ripe for the realization of death.

RJE THAMS CAD MKHYEN PA'I ZHAL NAS,
,DAL BA'I RTEN 'DI YID BZHIN NOR LAS 
LHAG,'DI 'DRA RNYED PA DA RES TZAM ZHIG YIN,
,RNYED DKA' 'JIG SLA NAM MKHA'I GLOG DANG 'DRA,
,TSUL 'DI BSAMS NAS 'JIG RTEN BYA BA KUN,
,SBUN PA 'PHYAR BA BZHIN DU RTOGS GYUR NAS,
,NYIN MTSAN KUN TU SNYING PO LEN PA DGOS,
,RNAL 'BYOR NGAS KYANG NYAMS LEN DE LTAR BYAS,
,THAR 'DOD KHYED KYANG DE BZHIN BSKYANG 'TSAL LO, ,
The all-knowing Lord Tsongkapa has said himself,
This body of leisure's more valuable than
a jewel that gives any wish,
And now is the only time you will ever
find a one like this.
It's hard to find, and easily dies,
like lightning in the sky.

Think this over carefully, and come
to realize
That every action of the world is like
the chaff of grain,
And so you must strive night and day
to make the most of life.
I, the master meditator, put this
into practice;
You, who seek for freedom, must
conduct yourselves this way.103

ZHES GSUNGS PA LTAR 'JIG RTEN CHOS BRGYAD BLOS BTANG STE SGRUB PA NYAMS LEN GSHA' MA ZHIG YONG BA LA DAL 'BYOR DON CHE RNYED DKA' DANG , 'CHI BA MI RTAG PA GNYIS KYI RTOGS PA SKYE BA ZHIG DGOS, DE SKYES NA RI THAMS CAD GSER DANG , CHU THAMS CAD 'O MA, MI THAMS CAD RANG GI BRAN DU GYUR KYANG MI MKHO BA SKYUG NAD CAN LA BTZO ZAN BYIN PA LTAR ZHEN PA GTING NAS LOG PA ZHIG YONG , RTOGS PA DE YANG THOS BYUNG GZHAN STOBS KYIS SKYES PAS MI CHOG PAR, BSAM BYUNG RANG STOBS KYIS SKYES NA GZHAN DU MI 'GYUR BAR BRTAN PO 'ONG BA YIN,
The point here is that, to rid yourself of the eight worldly thoughts and
undertake a spiritual practice which is truly pure, you must gain two different
realizations: first, of how valuable and hard to find one's life of leisure and
fortune is; secondly, of one's own impermanence and the fact that he must die.
Once you gain these realizations, it doesn't matter--the hills can turn to gold,
the rivers into milk, and every man your slave--but to you it's all repulsive,
useless, like a feast set before a sick man vomiting. And it's not enough for
these realizations to come to you just from the outside--from sitting and
listening to someone describe them. They must come from the inside, from
thinking about them yourself. Then they will be firm in your mind, and never
change again.

DE YANG GZHUNG DU, DAL 'BYOR RNYED DKA' ZHES PAS DAL 'BYOR NGOS BZUNG BA DANG , DON CHE BA BSAM PA, RNYED DKA' BA BSAM PA RNAMS BSTAN, DAL BA NI MI KHOM PA 
BRGYAD DANG BRAL ZHING CHOS BYED PA LA KHOM PA DANG , 'BYOR PA NI RANG MIR SKYES SHING SANGS RGYAS KYI BSTAN PA'I SGOR ZHUGS PA SOGS CHOS SGRUB PA'I PHYI NANG GI MTHUN RKYEN RANG LA TSANG BA'AM LDAN PA,
Now a single expression in the root verse, the one that reads "Leisure and
fortune are hard to find," serves to introduce three different concepts:
recognizing one's leisure and fortune, contemplating their incredible value, and
contemplating how hard they are to find. What we mean by "leisure" is to be
free of the eight different ways a person can lack opportunity, and to the
opportunity to attempt some spiritual practice.104
"Fortune" refers to the fact
that one is fortunate enough to possess all the inner and outer circumstances
that will allow him to undertake his practice. These include having taken birth
as a human being, having entered the Buddha's teaching, and so on.105

LUS RTEN 'DIR PHYI MA'I DON SGRUB PA NAS SANGS RGYAS KYI GO 'PHANG SGRUB PA MAN CHAD RANG LAG NA YOD PAS DON CHE BA, RNYED DKA' BA LA GSUM LAS   
This body we live in gives us in our own two hands the ability to achieve
everything from good things in our next life on up to the state of Buddhahood
itself, and thus is incredibly valuable. Such a body and life are difficult to find,
from three different points of view.

   RGYU'I SGO NAS DAL 'BYOR THOB PA'I RGYU TSUL KHRIMS RNAM PAR DAG PA BSRUNG BA SOGS DKON PAS 'BRAS BU DAL 'BYOR GYI RTEN RNYED DKA', NGO BO'I SGO NAS SPYIR NGAN 'GRO LAS BDE 'GRO NYUNG , 'GRO BA GZHAN LAS MI NYUNG , MI'I NANG NAS 'DZAM BU'I GLING PA NYUNG , 'DZAM BU GLING PA'I NANG NAS KYANG DAL 'BYOR THOB PA SHIN TU NYUNG BAS RNYED DKA',
We can start with the "causal" viewpoint. This life of leisure and fortune is
hard to find because it is a specific result of the special causes that can bring
one leisure and fortune, and these causes are extremely rare--keeping your
moral life completely pure, and so on. Then there is the viewpoint of the
"nature of the thing." Generally speaking, there are fewer beings in the happier

realms than there are in the realms of misery.106
Of all those in the happier
realms, humans are the fewest. Of all the different human beings, those who
live in the world we know are the fewest. And of all the humans in our
world, those who've attained leisure and fortune are very, very few. Thus this
life's by nature hard to find.

DPE'I SGO NAS GSER GYI GNYA' SHING BU GA GCIG PA ZHIG RGYA MTSO CHEN PO'I KHAR RGYA MTSO'I RLABS KYIS PHYOGS KUN TU KHYER BA LA, RUS SBAL LONG BA GCIG RGYA MTSO'I GTING DU GNAS PA LO BRGYA RE'I MTSAMS NAS RGYA MTSO'I KHAR MGO RDOG TZAM DU LAN RE 'ONG BA'I MGRIN PA GNYA' SHING GI BU GA DANG 'PHRAD PA SRID MTHA' TZAM YIN PA   
Finally a life like ours is hard to find from the viewpoint of the "classical
example." Suppose there were a single yoke-like ring of pure gold that could
float upon the surface of the great ocean. The swells of the sea push it back
and forth, in every direction you can imagine. Far down in the very depths of
the ocean lives a great sea-turtle. He is sightless. Once, and only once, in the
span of an entire century he swims to the surface, to poke his head up
momentarily. And suppose the golden ring happens to catch him around the
neck. The odds against it are nearly infinite.

   BZHIN DU SANGS RGYAS KYI BSTAN PA 'JIG RTEN GYI KHAMS GZHAN DANG GZHAN DU RES KYIS DAR BA LA, RANG MA RIG PAS MIG LDONG STE 'KHOR BA'I RGYA MTSO'I GTING DU GTAN SDOD BYAS KYANG DA RES DAL 'BYOR GYI MI LUS THOB PA NI CHES RNYED PAR DKA' BA SRID MTHA' TZAM ZHIG RNYED PA YIN,
Our case is the same. The teachings of the Buddha pass now and again among
the various planets of the universe. Here are we, blinded by our ignorance.
We are permanent inhabitants of the deepest reaches within the ocean of cyclic
life. A human body, complete with leisure and fortune, will be fantastically
hard to find; the odds against it are almost infinite. But this time we have
found one.

DE LTAR DAL 'BYOR DON CHE ZHING RNYED PAR DKA' BA LAN CIG TZAM RNYED PA'I SKABS 'DIR SNYING PO KHYAD PAR CAN ZHIG NGES PAR LEN DGOS PAS DE NI THEG PA CHEN PO'I CHOS NYAMS SU LEN PA KHO NA YIN,
So our life of leisure and fortune is incredibly valuable, and difficult to find;
this is the first and last time we will ever have such a chance. We must now
make the greatest use we can of it. The single highest thing we can do with
this life is to practice the Greater Way.

DE YANG DA LTA NYID NAS MA BLANGS NA RING POR MI THOGS PAR 'CHI BA MI RTAG PA 'ONG , 'CHI BA DRAN PA'I BLO DE YANG RANG GAR 'CHI BA 'ONG LUGS SHES PA TZAM DANG BSAM PA TZAM GYIS 'CHI BA GSHA' MA DRAN PA ZHIG 'ONG DKA' BAS BLO ZHIB TU SBYONG BA DGOS,
And we must begin this practice now, right now. Little time remains before
the inevitable death comes to us. We must constantly bring our death to mind;
just some vague awareness that someday death will come, or thinking some
about death, is not enough to really keep your coming death in mind. You
must train yourself, meticulously, in what it is to die.

GZHUNG 'DIR YANG TSE LA LONG MED CES PAS 'CHI BA DRAN TSUL BSTAN PA YIN, DE LA 'CHI BA DRAN PA'I PHAN YON, MA DRAN PA'I NYES DMIGS, 'CHI BA DRAN TSUL DNGOS KYI RTZA BA GSUM DANG , RGYU MTSAN DGU, THAG BCAD PA GSUM, 'CHI BA'I RNAM PA BSGOM PA RNAMS YUN BSRING STE SBYANG NA 'CHI BA DRAN PA'I BLO RNAL MA SKYES TE TSE 'DI'I SNANG SHAS LDOG PA ZHIG 'BYUNG , 'CHI BA MI RTAG PA DRAN PA'I BSAM BYUNG GI BLO NAM RGYUD LA SKYES PA NA CHOS DGE SBYOR GYI RKANG TSUGS ZHES PA DE BYUNG BA YIN,
In our root text, the instruction on how to keep your mind on death is
presented in the words "life's not long." This instruction includes a number of
categories: the benefits that come from keeping your mind on death, the
problems that come from not keeping your mind on death, and how then

actually to keep your mind on death. This last category itself includes the
three basic principles, the nine reasons for them, and the three resolves to be
made because of them--all ending with the meditation on what it's like to
die.107
A person who trains himself in these categories over a long period of
time is able to develop the true attitude of keeping his mind on death, and
then gains the ability to turn back his desire for the pleasures of the present
life. When a person through the process of careful contemplation has
developed this attitude of keeping his mind on his own death and
impermanence, then we can say the virtuous way has taken its root within
him.

'CHI BA SGOM TSUL DANG , 'OG NAS 'BYUNG BA'I SKYABS 'GRO LAS 'BRAS LA SOGS PA'I RNAM GZHAG RGYAS PA NI BYANG CHUB LAM GYI RIM PA'I KHRID LAS BYUNG BA LTAR SHES DGOS, GZHUNG 'DIR NGAN SONG GI SDUG BSNGAL BSAM PA DANG , SKYABS 'GRO'I CHOS SKOR RNAMS TSIG ZIN LA DNGOS SU MA GSUNGS KYANG , SHUGS LA BSTAN PA YIN GSUNGS,
At this point one should study the more detailed presentation of death
meditation that appears in the standard works on the Steps of the path to
Buddhahood. This applies as well to other topics following, such as how to go
for refuge, and the teaching on actions and their consequences. Here in this
text, concluded our Lama, the traditional contemplations on the sufferings of
the lower births and the entire set of instructions about going for refuge are
conveyed by implication, though not directly in the actual words of the verses.

Notes to Reading Five
79. We call someone... From a classic text on the teachings of emptiness by
Master Aryadeva (c. 200 A.D.). Quotation from f. 13a, entry 40.
80. six images for the instruction: For these and the three "problems of the pot,"
see note 16.
81. the first one of these verses: The greater "Steps on the Path" treats the
eminence of the author on folios 3a-8a, and the eminence of the teaching on
folios 8a-14b. Advice on how to teach and learn the steps is found on folios
14b-22a. The actual instructions on how to lead students along the Steps of the
path comprise folios 22a-523a. These four basic sections are found in the
middle-length version of the "Steps on the Path" at folios 2a-5b; folios 5b-8b;
folios 8b-13b; and folios 13b-201b. Both works are by Lord Tsongkapa (see
entries 61 and 60, respectively).
82. normal suffering being: Our being consists of our physical form, our feelings,
our ability to discriminate, our remaining mental functions and various other
parts, and our consciousness. These are known as the "heaps," or groups of
things that make us up, since each of the five divisions involves numerous
members piled together. They are "impure" basically because they are
products of and also promote bad thoughts and ignorant actions.
83. lower nirvana: Nirvana, or the permanent end of all one's mental afflictions,
is equivalent to Buddhahood if one attains it with the wish to liberate all
beings. Nirvana without this wish is a "lower nirvana."
84. About this attitude... Quotation found on ff. 168a-168b of Lord Tsongkapa's
Greater Steps on the Path (entry 61). Sharawa (1070-1141) was one of the pillars
of the early Seer tradition of Tibetan Buddhist masters; he was a student of the
great Potowa and a teacher of the illustrious Chekapa.
85. Only in Tibet... Original source not found. The quotation also appears in the
greater work on the Steps by Lord Tsongkapa (f. 206b, entry 61).
86. No practitioner, a person who loves this life... Quotation from p. 436 of this
classic "mental training" text of the venerable Drakpa Gyeltsen (entry 12, see
also note 53). The "four loves" are listed this way:

Love for this life, which makes one
no practitioner.
Love for this world, which is no
renunciation.
Love for one's selfish interests, which
makes one no bodhisattva.
Grasping to a real "me," which is no
correct view.
87. repeated three times, and loud: A full account of the incident is found in the
Collected Sayings of the Seers, compiled by Tsunpa Chegom; see f. 21, entry 18.
For information on Lord Drom Tonpa, see note 49.
88. Shang Nachung Tonpa: The incident with Lord Atisha is related by Lord
Tsongkapa in his Greater Steps on the Path (f. 192a, entry 61); similar exchanges
appear in Pabongka Rinpoche's Liberation (ff. 169a and 294a, entry 47) and in
the Collected Sayings of the Seers (f. 5b, entry 18). We read in the Blue Annals
that this student was himself a master of the teachings of Loving One, the
Future Buddha, and imparted them to Monton Jung-ne Sherab, a nephew of
the renowned translator Ma Lotsawa (pp. 232-3, entry 94).
89. They go into seclusion... Source of this and the following quotation not found.
Both appear in Pabongka Rinpoche's Liberation in Our Hands (f. 171a, entry 47).
"Droway Gonpo" is a name applied to a number of Tibetan sages; Pabongka
Rinpoche adds the word "Gyer" before the name in one instance, but it is still
not clear to whom the quotations are to be attributed.
90. All the spiritual practice... Original source of quotation not found. Ngari
Panchen, full name Padma Wangyal (1487-1543), was a sage of the Nyingma
tradition of Tibetan Buddhism.
91. Oh worldly wise! From the famed epistle of spiritual instruction sent by the
great Buddhist philosopher Master Nagarjuna (c. 200 A.D.) to the Indian king
Udayibhadra (f. 42a, entry 6; for English translation see p. 68, entry 95).
92. In the city of daily concerns... Original source of quotation not found; the lines
appear as well in Pabongka Rinpoche's work on the Steps (f. 169b, entry 47).
It is a practice for Buddhist meditators to go to some frightening place, like a
cemetery or a high cliff, to observe their heightened sense of a "self" and better
understand it. Graveyards in Tibet and India were especially fear-inspiring
because bodies were simply laid out rather than buried, and this would attract

dangerous wild animals. The great Lingrepa, full name Padma Dorje
(1128-1188), was a student of Droway Gonpo Pakmo Drupa and founded one
of the orders of the Kagyu tradition of Tibetan Buddhism.
93. It doesn't do any good... The quotation is found, fittingly, in his treatise on
the secret practice of "great completion" (p. 221, entry 76). Yang Gonpa, full
name Gyal Tsen Pel (1213-1258) and his teacher Gu-tsangpa Gonpo Dorje
(1189-1258) were also founding fathers of one of the orders of the Kagyu
tradition.
94. ten "ultimate riches": We see the roots of these ten riches in the instructions
of Geshe Shawopa among the Collected Sayings of the Seers (ff. 47b-48b, entry
18).
95. And in the days when my teaching... The Buddha's eloquent oath appears on
f. 414, entry 28. The "saffron robe" is that of a Buddhist monk.
96. In future days... Source of this and following quotation not located.
97. Gyalchok Kelsang Gyatso (1708-1757) and Panchen Lobsang Yeshe (1663-1737):
The former was the seventh of the Dalai Lamas, spiritual and temporal rulers
of Tibet. He built the Norbulingka, magnificent summer palace of the Dalai
Lamas, and sponsored a carving of the wooden printing-blocks for the entire
collection of over 4,000 titles in the Tibetan Buddhist canon. The latter figure
was the second of the Panchen Lamas, another exalted lineage of spiritual and
temporal leaders centered at the great Tashi Lhunpo Monastery in
south-central Tibet. He was an eminent practitioner and scholar of Buddhism
while still one of the most powerful political figures of his time.
98. relinquished their thrones and left the home: The Buddha himself turned down
the opportunity to become a World Emperor, and was originally Prince
Siddhartha, son of King Suddhodana and Queen Maya of the vast Shakya
empire of north India. Master Shantideva, the great 8th Century Buddhist
philosopher and poet, was born son of the king of Saurashtra, in what is now
Gujarat (north of Bombay). Lord Atisha was the son of King Kalyanashri and
Queen Prabhavati, rulers of the 10th Century Sahor kingdom of Bengal, around
Calcutta; their might was said to equal that of the Emperor of China.
99. the emperor of China: The incident occurred in 1408, and the emissaries were
dispatched by Yung Lo, the third emperor of the Ming Dynasty. In his stead,
Lord Tsongkapa sent Jamchen Chuje Shakya Yeshe, who later went on to
found the great Sera Monastery, where Pabongka Rinpoche was himself trained
nearly 500 years later. The "Purest Eight" who followed the Master into retreat
were Jamkarwa Jampel Chusang, Neten Sang-kyongwa, Neten Rinchen

Gyeltsen, Neten Jangsengpa, Lama Jampel Gyatso, Geshe Sherab Drak, Geshe
Jampel Tashi, and Geshe Pelkyong.
100. Milarepa, of days gone by... The great Wensapa (1505- 1566) was the learned
teacher of Kedrup Sangye Yeshe, who was in turn the teacher of the first
Panchen Lama. The "Lobsang Dundrup" of the verse is Wensapa himself, for
this was his ordination name. His glowing reference to his own attainments
seems presumptuous until we realize that he is referring only to what he hopes
he can be, for the verse is found in a section of his writings entitled "Advices
to Myself" (see f. 26B, entry 53).
101. If in your heart... The quoted lines appear on p. 163 of the famous
biography of Lord Milarepa by his disciple Rechung Dorje Drakpa (1083-1161);
see entry 36.
102. No way my loved ones know... The lines are found in the section about Lord
Milarepa (ff. 72-100) from the Ocean of Songs of the Kagyu by Karmapa Mikyu
Dorje (1507-1554); see entry 58.
103. This body of leisure... Another quotation from the very brief version of Lord
Tsongkapa's Steps on the Path to Buddhahood; see f. 56a, entry 63.
104. eight ways of lacking opportunity: These are to hold wrong views, such as
believing that what you do does not come back to you; to be born as an
animal; birth as an insatiable spirit; birth in the hells; birth in a land where the
Buddha's teachings are not available; birth in an "uncivilized" land, where no
one keeps the vows of morality; birth as a human who is retarded or otherwise
handicapped, and so cannot practice the teachings; and birth as a long-lived
being of pleasure in one of the temporary paradises (Lord Tsongkapa, pp.
135-7, entry 61; Pabongka Rinpoche, ff. 154b-156b, entry 47; and Master
Nagarjuna, pp. 95-6 of the English translation, entry 95).
105. "Fortune": The "fortunes" we have are divided into two groups of five:
those that relate to ourselves--personal qualities--and those that relate to
"others," or the outside world. The first five are to be born as a human; to be
born in a "central" land, where people keep the traditional vows of morality;
to be born with all one's faculties intact; not to have committed heinous
misdeeds, such as killing one's parents; and to have faith in the teachings. The
second five are to live in a world where a Buddha has come; where his
teachings have been spoken; where the teachings spoken have not been lost;
where people still practice them; and where practitioners enjoy the kind
support they require (Lord Tsongkapa, entry 61, pp. 137-8; Pabongka Rinpoche,
entry 47, ff. 156b-158a).

106. happier realms: These consist of the beings who live as humans, as full
pleasure beings in the temporary paradises, and as lesser pleasure beings.
107. benefits that come from keeping your mind on death, etc.: In his masterwork
Liberation in Our Hands, Pabongka Rinpoche lists six benefits of keeping your
mind on death: your practice becomes really pure; it gains power; the thoughts
help you start practice; they help you strive hard during your practice; they
help bring your practice to a successful conclusion; and in the hour of death
you go with satisfaction, for you know you have spent your life meaningfully.
The Rinpoche also lists six problems that come from not keeping your mind
on death: you neglect your religious life, and spend all your days in thoughts
of what to eat or wear-- this life's distractions; you consider death occasionally
but always think it will come later, and delay your practice; or you do practice,
but for the wrong reason--with hopes of reputation; you practice but with no
enthusiasm, and drop it after a while; you get deeper into this life, your
attitude gets worse, and life begins to hurt you; and at death you naturally feel
intense regret, for you have wasted all your efforts on this present life.
The three principles, for how actually to keep your mind on death, have three
reasons each, making a total of nine. First of all, death is certain: no power in
the universe can stop death when it arrives; there is no way to add time to
your life, you come closer to death every minute; even while you are alive, the
free time available for your practice is extremely limited before you have to
die.
The second principle is that there is absolutely no certainty when you will die.
We are in a time and realm where the length of life is uncertain; we can be
sure we will never have enough time to defeat all our enemies, raise up all our
friends, and still complete our religious practice before we die. The things that
can kill us are many; the things that keep us alive are few. And in general the
body we have is fragile, weak: a small splinter in the hand can give us an
infection that kills us--we are like bubbles, like candles in a windstorm.
The third principle is that, at the moment of death, nothing at all can help us
but our spiritual practice. None of your money or things can help you. None
of your friends or family can help you--they can be holding you tightly by the
arms and legs, but still you will slip away alone. And not even your own
body can help you--you have to give up your most cherished possession, your
beloved body, along with everything else.
The three principles call for three resolves on our part. Knowing that we shall
have to die, we must resolve to begin our practice. Knowing that we could die
any time, we must quit our worldly work immediately and start our practice

today. And finally, since nothing else can help us, we must devote ourselves
to our practice only. A man who is hiking many miles doesn't fill up his pack
with a lot of crap that he won't be needing.
The above points are paraphrased from the works on the Steps of the path by
Lord Tsongkapa (entry 61, ff. 65-75) and Pabongka Rinpoche (entry 47, ff.
168-182). For the last point mentioned in the text, the meditation on what it's
like to die, we quote the Rinpoche directly (ff. 182b-183a):
They try all different kinds of treatments and holy rituals but
your condition gets worse and worse. The doctors start lying to
you. Your friends and relatives say all sorts of cheery things to
your face, but behind your back they start wrapping up your
affairs, because everyone can see you're going to die.
Your body starts to lose its familiar warmth. It's hard to breathe.
The nostrils collapse. The lips curl back. The color starts to
drain from your face. All sorts of repulsive signs begin to show,
inside and outside of you.
You think of all the wrong things you did in your life, and wish
so badly you had never done them. You can't quite be sure if
you ever really got rid of them all when you confessed; or that
you really did any true good deed.
Then comes the final pain, the unspeakable searing pain that
comes with death. The basic building blocks of your body begin
their domino collapse, you are blinded by catastrophic images,
hallucinations of pure terror crowd into your mind, and carry
you away, and the whole world you have been living blinks out.
People take your corpse and wrap it up in a sheet and lay it in
some corner. They hang up a curtain to hide it. Somebody
lights up a smudgy little candle and leaves it there. If you're one
of those reincarnated lamas, they dress you up in you fancy
ritual robes and try to make you look good.
Right now we are all running around trying to arrange ourselves
a nice house, soft clothes, cozy chairs. But you know the custom
here in Tibet--when you die they'll tie your arms and legs up
against your chest with a leather strap, carry the body far from
town, and throw it naked out on the rocks.

Right now we all go home and try to cook ourselves up some
delectable dish--but there will come a day when you stand there
praying for a little taste of those cakes they offer the spirits of the
dead. Right now we have the big name--they call us Doctor
Professor, or Respected Sir, or Your Reverence. But there will
come a day when they look at your body and call you nothing
but "that stinking corpse." There will come a day when the title
they put in front of your name is "the late," or "that guy they
used to call..."
So now when you respected lamas out there in the audience look
at your ritual robes, let it come into your thoughts that these are
the robes they will dress your remains in after you have expired.
And all the rest of us, when we look at our bedsheets before we
go to sleep, should try to remember that these are what they will
wrap our stinking corpse in when we die. As Milarepa said,
That frightful corpse they talk about
Is the very body you wear, meditator.
He means look at your own body now, and always see the future
corpse.

127
The Asian Classics Institute
Course I: The Principal Teachings of Buddhism
Reading Six
IX. Stopping Desire for Future Lives

GNYIS PA PHYI MA'I SNANG SHAS LDOG TSUL NI,
This brings us to the teaching on how to stop desire for one's future lives,
which is the second step in developing the path known as renunciation.

LAS 'BRAS MI BSLU 'KHOR BA'I SDUG BSNGAL RNAMS,
,YANG YANG BSAMS PAS PHYI MA'I SNANG SHAS 
LDOG,CES PAS BSTAN TE,
(4b)
Think over and over how deeds and their fruits
never fail,
And the cycle's suffering: stop desire
for the future.

RANG PHYI MAR TSANGS PA BRGYA BYIN DANG 'KHOR SGYUR LTA BU'I LUS LONGS SPYOD SOGS GNAS DANG YO BYAD PHUN SUM TSOGS PA'I BDE SKYID BZANG PO ZHIG BYUNG NA SNYAM PA NI PHYI MA'I SNANG SHAS YIN, KUN SLONG SEMS CAN GYI DON BYA RGYU'I BSAM BLO MED PAR, DAG ZHING DU SKYES NA SDUG BSNGAL MI MYONG BAS RANG SKYID PA 'ONG SNYAM PA TSO YANG PHAR DED NA PHAL CHER PHYI MA'I SNANG SHAS KYI DBANG DU 'GRO TSOD SNANG ,
Now what we mean by "desire for the future" is the kind of attitude where you
think to yourself, "I hope in my future births I can live like some god-like
being, such as the creatures they call Pure-One and Hundred-Gift, or like one
of those Wheel Emperors who rule the entire world. May I live in some
wonderful state of happiness, in the best of places, with the best of things, with
a beautiful body and everything I wish for at my fingertips." Incidentally, we
also see people who pray to be born in one of the truly pure realms of a
Buddha, where they will never have to suffer and can enjoy everlasting
happiness--but they pray so without any intention of reaching this high state
in order to help other beings. If we really follow this line of thinking to its
end, it would appear that people like this have for the most part simply
slipped into the base desire for future lives.

LAM RIM DU SKYES BU CHUNG NGU'I LAS 'BRAS KYIS TSE 'DI DANG , 'BRING GIS PHYI MA'I SNANG SHAS LDOG TSUL GSUNGS KYANG , LAM GTZO 'DIR DAL 'BYOR DANG MI RTAG PAS TSE 'DI DANG , LAS 'BRAS DANG 'KHOR BA'I SDUG BSNGAL BSAM PA GNYIS ZUNG 'BREL GYIS PHYI MA'I SNANG SHAS LDOG THABS SU GSUNGS PA'I   
In standard texts on the Steps of the path to Buddhahood, we are taught the
principles of actions and their consequences in the section for people whose
practice is of a lesser scope, in order to stop our desire for this present life.
The instructions for people of a medium scope then are meant to help us stop
our desire for a future life. Here in the teaching on the three principal paths
though we are advised to meditate on our leisure and fortune, as well as
impermanence, in order to stop our desire for this life; our desire for future
lives is to be stopped by a combination of understanding the principles of
actions and their consequences and contemplating the various sufferings of
cyclic life.

   GNAD GCIG NI LAS 'BRAS PHRA ZHING PHRA BA YIN PAS 'KHOR BA LAS GTAN NAS MA THAR NA SLAR YANG SDIG PA'I 'BRAS BUS 'KHOR BAR 'KHOR BAS DANG , GCIG NI 'KHOR BA LAS LDOG PA LA MA RIG PAS KUN NAS BSLANGS PA'I LAS KYI RIGS MTHA' DAG LDOG DGOS PAS DE'I DON DU MDZAD PA YIN,
This latter way of making the presentation is meant to convey two important
points. The first is that, since the forces of action and consequence are so
extremely subtle, the consequences of any misdeed will wheel one back into
the circle of life if one fails to make a complete escape from the cycle first. The
second is that, in order to defeat this circle, one must stop each and every
action he performs which is motivated by ignorance.

DES NA 'KHOR BA LAS THAR BA LA DKAR NAG GI LAS 'BRAS LA BLANG DOR DGOS, DE LA DANG POR LAS 'BRAS LA YID CHES DGOS, DE LA LAS 'BRAS BSAM DGOS,
Thus we can say that, in order to escape the circle of life, one must take up
white actions and abandon black actions. But to do this, he must believe in the
law of actions and consequences at all. And to do this, he must contemplate
upon actions and consequences.

BSAM TSUL YANG SANGS RGYAS KYIS LAS NGES PA'I TSUL, LAS 'PHEL CHE BA, LAS MA BYAS PA DANG MI 'PHRAD PA, BYAS PA CHUD MI ZA BA STE LAS KYI TSUL BZHI'I SGO NAS GSUNGS PA RNAMS ZHIB TU BSAM NA LAS 'BRAS LA YID CHES KYI DAD PA SKYES TE BLANG DOR LAG LEN BYED PA RANG SHUGS KYIS 'ONG BA YIN,
This contemplation is done by considering, very carefully, the four principles
of action which the Buddha enunciated:
1) Actions are certain to produce similar consequences.
2) The consequences are greater than the actions.
3) One cannot meet a consequence if he has not
committed an action.
4) Once an action is committed, the consequence cannot be
lost.
Once a person has gained a well-founded belief in these principles, he will
automatically in his daily life avoid doing wrong things and begin doing right
things.

LAM RIM DU MI RTAG PA'I RJES SU NGAN SONG GSUM DANG SKYABS 'GRO'I SKOR GSUNGS SHING , GZHUNG 'DI'I YANG DGONGS PA LTAR DA RES LAM RIM NAS KHA BSKANG STE CUNG ZAD ZHU NA,
In texts on the Steps of the path to Buddhahood, the instruction on
impermanence is followed by sections that treat the three lower births and how
to go for refuge. Here we will weave in some of these points from the
Steps--which is also the intent of the text at hand.

'CHI BA'I 'OG TU RNAM SHES MAR ME SHI BA LTAR MED DE MI 'GRO BAR SKYE BA ZHIG LEN DGOS, SKYE SA DE YANG NGAN 'GRO DANG BDE 'GRO GNYIS YIN, DE GNYIS GANG DU SKYE RANG LA RANG DBANG MED PAR LAS KYI RJES SU 'GRO DGOS PAS DGE BAS BDE 'GRO DANG MI DGE BAS NGAN 'GROR 'PHEN,
After you die, your consciousness doesn't just go out like a lamp--you must
take another birth. And there are only two kinds of birth you can take: one of
the births of misery, or one of the happier births. As for which of the two you
do take, you are totally helpless: you must follow the direction of your past
actions. Virtuous actions throw you into one of the happier types of birth, and
non-virtuous actions throw you into one of the three of misery.

DE YANG LAS MI DGE BA CHEN POS DMYAL BA, 'BRING GIS YI DVAGS, CHUNG NGUS DUD 'GROR SKYE, LAS DGE BA CHEN POS KHAMS GONG MA GNYIS KYI LHA, 'BRING GIS 'DOD PA'I LHA, CHUNG NGUS 'DOD KHAMS KYI MIR SKYE BA YIN, DE LTAR YANG DPAL MGON KLU SGRUB KYIS,
Great non-virtuous acts lead you to the hells; medium ones lead you to a birth
as an insatiable spirit; and lesser non-virtues make you take birth as an animal.
Great virtuous acts, on the other hand, bring you a birth as a pleasure-being
in one of the two higher realms; medium virtues make you a pleasure being
of the desire realm; and lesser virtues bring birth as a human in the same
realm.108
As our glorious protector, Nagarjuna, has stated,

,MI DGE BA LAS SDUG BSNGAL KUN,
,DE BZHIN NGAN 'GRO THAMS DO,
,DGE LAS BDE 'GRO THAMS CAD DANG ,
,SKYE BA KUN TU BDE BA 
DAG,CES GSUNGS,
Non-virtue brings all sufferings
And all the births of misery.
Virtue brings all happier births,
And happiness in all one's births.109

DE LTAR NA RANG RE LA DGE BA NI STOBS CHUNG ZHING MI DGE BA NI SHIN TU STOBS CHE BAS 'DI GA'I NGANG NAS 'CHI NA NI PHYI MAR NGAN 'GROR SKYE BA THAG CHOD,
Since this is the case, and since all the virtues you and I have are feeble--while
all our non-virtues are ever so mighty--then if we were to die in our present
condition it's a foregone conclusion that we would take birth in one of the
realms of misery.

NGAN SONG DU SKYES TSE DMYAL BA PA LA TSA GRANG BTZO BSREG LA SOGS PA DANG , YI DVAGS LA BKRES SKOM NGAL 'JIGS LA SOGS PA DANG , DUD 'GRO LA GLEN ZHING GTI MUG PA DANG , BKOL SPYOD LA SOGS PA'I SDUG BSNGAL BZOD GLAGS MED,
Taking our birth in one of these realms, we would meet unbearable sufferings.
As a hellbeing there would be unspeakable heat or cold, our bodies boiled or
scorched, and more. As insatiable spirits we would always be hungry, or
thirsty, in a constant state of exhaustion and fear. As animals we would be
mindless brutes incapable of saying a thing, exploited by humans for their
work or food.

DE LTA BU'I NGAN SONG DU MI 'GRO BA'I THABS SU DKON MCHOG GSUM LA SNYING NAS SKYABS BCOL, LAS 'BRAS KYI BLANG DOR LA TSUL BZHIN DU 'BAD DGOS,
There is a way to avoid these births of misery, and this is to turn ourselves
over to the three rare jewels110
for their protection, and do so from the bottom
of our hearts, and strive our best in choosing correctly which actions we should
undertake, and which we should abandon.

SKYABS 'GRO'I BSLAB BYA'I GTZO BO YANG LAS 'BRAS LA BLANG DOR BYED PA 'DI YIN, LAS 'BRAS 'DI MA BSRUNGS NA NGAN 'GROR SKYE BA THAG CHOD CHOD PA RED, DE YANG RANG CAG PHAL CHE BA 'DI CHOS RANG GIS MA SHES PA GCIG PUS NGAN SONG DU SONG BA MIN YANG , CHOS SHES KYANG LAG TU MA BLANGS PA DANG , LAS 'BRAS KHYAD DU BSAD PAS NGAN SONG DU 'GRO BA CHES MANG BA YIN,
This correct decision in choosing our actions is actually the single most
important instruction in the entire teaching on how to go for refuge. Once we
disregard the principles of action and consequence, it's already decided that we
will take our birth in the realms of misery. People like you and I here in this
assembly, mostly monks, are not likely to take one of these lower births simply
because we know nothing of the spiritual teachings. But remember: there have
been absolute multitudes of people like us, who had a knowledge of the
teachings, but who passed to the realms of misery because they could not put
these teachings into actual practice, or because they chose to disregard the laws
of action and consequence.

LAS 'BRAS KHYAD DU BSAD NA MKHAS PA DANG BTZUN PA JI 'DRA ZHIG YIN KYANG NGAN SONG DU 'GRO, LAS 'BRAS 'DI LA NAN TAN MA BYAS NA, MKHAS PA SDE SNOD 'DZIN PA DANG , GRUB PA THOB PA'I RNAL 'BYOR PA DANG , MNGON SHES DANG RDZU 'PHRUL LA MNGA' BRNYES PA YIN KYANG SDUG BSNGAL MYONG DGOS PA,
And we must heed these laws. A man who does not must take a lower birth,
and it doesn't matter how knowledgeable he was, or how saintly. You can be
a sage who has mastered the entire contents of the canon, you can be an
advanced meditator with fantastic spiritual accomplishments, you can have
great extrasensory powers, and ability to perform miracles; but if you cannot
behave with care around action and consequence, you will suffer.

DPER NA DGE SLONG LEGS SKAR GYI BLOR SDE SNOD BCU GNYIS DANG , LHAS BYIN GYI BLOR CHOS PHUNG GCIG YOD PAS KYANG MA PHAN PAR DMYAL BAR SKYES PA DE CHOS SHES KYANG NYAMS SU MA BLANGS PA DANG , LAS 'BRAS KHYAD DU BSAD PA DANG , LAS 'BRAS LA DAD PA MA SKYES PA LAS BYUNG BA DANG 'DRA STE DE LTA BU'I SNGON BYUNG GI LO RGYUS CHES MANG DU YOD PA LAS SHES,
We have for example the monk named Lekkar, who could sit and recite all
twelve of the great collections of scripture,111
as well as Devadatta--who had
in his memory no less than that vast amount of scriptures we call a "heap."112
And yet ultimately it was no use to either one, for they took their rebirth in the
hells. This again would seem to be a case where the person had a knowledge
of the teachings, but was unable to put them into actual practice, or
disregarded the principles of actions and their consequences, or never gained
any belief in these principles in the first place. Accounts like these of people
who lived before us and made the same mistake are almost countless--and we
should learn from them.

DES NA 'DIR LAS 'BRAS SPYIR BSAM PA LA BZHI LAS, RGYU DGE BA BYAS PA'I 'BRAS BU BDE BA KHO NA LAS SDUG BSNGAL MI 'BYUNG , RGYU MI DGE BA BYAS PA'I 'BRAS BU SDUG BSNGAL KHO NA LAS BDE BA MI 'BYUNG BAS LAS NGES PA'I TSUL,
So this brings us to the four most general principles in our contemplation of
actions and their consequences:
1) If the cause involved is a virtuous act, then the consequence it
produces can only be pleasure, and never pain. If the cause
involved is a non-virtuous act, then the consequence it produces
can only be pain, and never pleasure. Thus the first principle is
that actions are certain to produce similar consequences.

RGYU DGE SDIG GNYIS CHUNG NGU RE LAS MA BYAS KYANG , 'BRAS BU BDE SDUG GNYIS KA SHIN TU STOBS CHEN PO 'BYUNG BAS LAS 'PHEL CHE BA,
2) The causes involved may be virtuous or non-virtuous acts
which are relatively minor, but the consequences they each
produce--the pleasure or the pain--will be of tremendous power.
The second principle then is that the consequences are greater than
the actions.

RGYU DGE SDIG GNYIS MA BYAS NA, 'BRAS BU BDE SDUG GANG YANG MI MYONG BAS LAS MA BYAS PA DANG MI 'PHRAD PA,
3) If one never performs the virtuous or non-virtuous action to
act as a cause, he will never experience a consequence of either
pleasure or pain. Thus the third principle: One cannot meet a
consequence if he has not committed an action.

RGYU DGE SDIG GNYIS BSAGS PA DE DGE BA KHONG KHRO SOGS KYIS MA BCOM ZHING , SDIG PA GNYEN POS MA BCOM NA LAS BYAS PA CHUD MI ZA BA YIN,
4) The fourth principle states that once a person has collected a
virtuous or non-virtuous action to act as a cause, once an action is
committed, the consequence cannot be lost--so long as the power of
a good deed, for example, is not destroyed by an emotion like
anger, or a bad deed by applying an appropriate antidote.113

DE YANG DGE SDIG GNYIS KA ZHING GI SGO NAS STOBS CHE BA DANG , DE BZHIN DU BSAM PA DANG , DNGOS PO DANG , RTEN GYI SGO NAS STOBS CHE BAR GSUNGS PA   
There are other principles as well; it is said that whether the action is virtuous
or non-virtuous, its power is multiplied if one performs it towards some
especially important object. The same thing happens if the thought behind the
action is particularly strong, or if the material with which one performs the
deed is somehow special, or even if the person performing the deed is
someone special.

   RNAMS LA YID CHES KYI DAD PA BRTAN PO SKYED DE, LAS 'BRAS PHRA ZHING ZAB PA'I TSUL RNAMS ZHIB TU BSAMS NAS LAG LEN BYED, LAG TU LEN PA NA BSRUNG SA NI MI DGE BCU SPONG GI STENG NAS BSRUNG DGOS,
You must try to gain some well-founded belief in these principles. Take time
to contemplate even the most deep and subtle workings of actions and their
consequences, and then put this understanding into actual practice. Putting the
laws of action and consequence into practice means keeping them--and this
means keeping the rules by avoiding the ten non-virtues.114

'JIG RTEN PA'I YANG DAG PA'I LTA BA ZHES PA'ANG 'DI YIN, 'DI SER SKYA TSANG MAS NYAMS SU LEN DGOS TE, 'JIG RTEN PA ZHES PA DE KHYIM PA SKYA BO GCIG PU LA GSUNGS PA MIN CING , 'PHAGS LAM MA THOB BAR DU TSANG MA SO SO SKYE BO YIN PAS SO SKYE YIN NA 'JIG RTEN PA YIN PAS KHYAB,
You've heard of the correct view that we call the "worldly" one--well this
understanding of actions and consequences is what it refers to. This view by
the way is something that everyone should adhere to, regardless of whether
they're a monk or nun or layman. You should realize that the word "worldly"
in this case is not just meant to refer to people who are still living the secular
life. There is an expression we use, "ordinary people," to refer to any person
who has yet to reach the path of a realized being.115
Whatever else we may be,
we are "worldly" people so long as we are ordinary people in this sense.

DES NA CHOS LAG LEN LAS 'BRAS NAS BYA DGOS, DE YANG LAM GYI 'GO BSHES GNYEN BSTEN TSUL, LAM RIM GYI 'GO DAL 'BYOR, SGOM GYI 'GO KUN SLONG , CHOS LAG LEN GYI 'GO LAS 'BRAS NAS TSUGS PA YIN GSUNGS,
Putting religion into practice then must start from keeping the laws of actions
and their consequences. It's been said that,
The path begins with proper reliance on
a spiritual guide.
The steps of the path begin with contemplating
your leisure and fortune.
Meditation begins with your motivation; and
Putting religion into practice begins with
observing the laws, of actions and
their consequences.116

DE'I PHYIR RANG GI SGO GSUM NYES PAS MA GOS PA BYED, BRGYA LA GOS NA'ANG BSHAGS PAS 'DAG PAR BYED DGOS,
Therefore we must never allow our body or speech or mind--any of the three
doors through which we express ourselves--to be tainted by misdeeds. And
if by some chance we do, we must purify ourselves of the misdeed through the
process of confession.

SPYIR LAS 'BRAS BSAMS PAS PHYI MA'I SNANG SHAS LDOG NUS KYANG , GTZO BO NI 'KHOR BA'I SDUG BSNGAL BSAM PA 'DI YIN, NGES 'BYUNG NI SPYIR DMYAL BA YANG SOS PA'I SDUG BSNGAL BSGOMS NAS DE LA YID SKRAG PA SKYES PA NA NGES 'BYUNG GI SNE DANG PO SKYE YANG , NGES 'BYUNG GI RTZAL YONGS SU RDZOGS PA NI 'KHOR BA'I PHUN TSOGS LA'ANG ZHEN PA LOG PA NA RDZOGS PA YIN,
Generally speaking, contemplation upon the principles of actions and their
consequences is enough to stop desire for the future life. But really the main
way is to contemplate the many sufferings of this cyclic life. In a broad sense,
we can say that renunciation has just begun to sprout in a person's heart once
he has meditated on the torments of "Revive" (the lightest hell) and feels a
sense of terror.117
But complete proficiency in renunciation comes only when
one feels a total disgust even for the supposed good things of this revolving
life.

'KHOR BA'I SDUG BSNGAL BSAM PA LA SPYIR BSAM PA DANG SO SOR BSAM PA GNYIS LAS, 'JAM DPAL ZHAL LUNG LA SO SOR BSAM PA SNGON DANG , SPYIR BSAM PA RJES SU GSUNGS SHING , BDE MYUR LA SPYIR BSAM PA SNGON DANG , SO SOR BSAM PA RJES SU GSUNGS PA DE RE RE LA'ANG GNAD RE YOD, DA LAM ZHAL LUNG LTAR ZHU NA,
The traditional contemplation of the sufferings of cyclic life has two parts:
considering these sufferings in general, and thinking them over one by one.
The text called Word of the Gentle One describes the individual sufferings first,
and then goes on to the general ones.118
The works known as Path of Bliss and

Quick Path, on the other hand, present the general sufferings first and the
individual sufferings later.119
Each way of doing it conveys a very valuable
lesson; here we will follow the Word.

SKYABS 'GRO DANG LAS 'BRAS KYI BLANG DOR LA 'BAD PAS NGAN SONG LAS THAR YANG , 'KHOR BA 'DI LAS GTAN NAS THAR BA ZHIG MA BYUNG NA NGAN SONG DU SKYES NA TA AA CANG STE BDE 'GRO'I RTEN BZANG PO ZHIG THOB KYANG SDUG BSNGAL KHO NA LAS MA 'DAS TE,
Doing your best to follow the teaching on going for refuge, and to make the
right decisions with regard to actions and their consequences, will free you
from having to take one of the three lower births. But what you really need
is to free yourself from the cycle of life altogether; for while you may have
avoided a lower birth, achieving some wonderful life in one of the happier
births is nothing but suffering anyway.

MI LA SKYES KYANG SKYE BA'I SDUG BSNGAL, RGA BA'I SDUG BSNGAL, NA BA'I SDUG BSNGAL, 'CHI BA'I SDUG BSNGAL, GNYEN SDUG PA DANG BRAL BA'I SDUG BSNGAL, DGRA MI SDUG PA DANG PHRAD PA'I SDUG BSNGAL, 'DOD PA'I DNGOS PO BTZAL KYANG MI RNYED PA'I SDUG BSNGAL SOGS DANG ,
Let's say you are born as a human; still you must suffer as you come from the
womb. Still you must suffer as your body gets older, day by day. Still you
must suffer when you are ill. Still you must suffer as you die. You must
suffer the pain of missing your beloved family. You must suffer the pain of
encountering your hated enemies. You must suffer the pain of working for the
things you want, and not being able to get them--and on and on.

LHA MA YIN DU SKYES NA 'THAB RTZOD DANG , PHRAG DOG GIS YID GDUNGS PA DANG , LUS BCAD PA DANG DRAL BA SOGS KYI SDUG BSNGAL,
Suppose you take the second type of happier birth--in some kind of heavenly
place, as one of the lesser beings of pleasure. Still in your life you suffer
during the fighting,120
and suffer from intense jealousy towards the higher
pleasure-beings, and suffer as you body is sliced apart or ripped to pieces, and
on and on.

LHAR SKYES KYANG 'DOD LHA LA SKYES NA, 'CHI LTAS PHOG PA DANG GNAS 'OG MAR LTUNG BA LA SOGS PA'I SDUG BSNGAL CHE ZHING , LHA RNAMS KYANG PHAL CHER SHI NAS NGAN 'GROR 'GRO STE SNGON DGE BA BSAGS PA'I LAS BZANG PO RNAMS NI LHA'I BDE SKYID DES 'DZAD, RTEN DE LA DGE BA NI GSAR DU MI GSOG CING , MI DGE BA NI CHAGS SOGS NYON MONGS PA STOBS CHEN YOD PAS DES NGAN SONG DU 'PHEN PA YIN,
Suppose finally that you become one of the higher pleasure-beings. They live
in all three realms of existence; let's say you get to be a being of pleasure in the
first of them--in the realm of desire. Still you go through terrible suffering as
after an incredibly long and pleasure-filled life the signs of death begin to ruin
your body, and then as you take your fall to a lower birth, and on and on--for
the vast majority of pleasure-beings go straight to one of the lives of misery.
All the stored-up positive power of the good deeds they did in their past lives
is squandered as they enjoy its consequences--the delights of a pleasure-
being's existence. During this existence they have no chance to store up any
more of this positive power. Still though they possess great supplies of bad
deeds--tremendous negative power in the form of mental afflictions like desire
and attachment. These then hurl them into a rebirth of misery when they die.
 KHAMS GONG MA'I LHAR SKYES NA SDUG BSNGAL MNGON 'GYUR BA MED KYANG KHYAB PA 'DU BYED KYI SDUG BSNGAL GYI RANG BZHIN CAN YIN PA DANG , GNAS PA LA RANG DBANG MED PAS NAM ZHIG SNGAR GYI LAS BZANG PO'I 'PHEN PA DE ZAD, LAS NGAN PA ZHIG DANG PHRAD NAS NGAN 'GROR 'GRO , DE LTAR NA 'KHOR BA'I PHUN TSOGS JI LTAR BYUNG YANG YID GTAN MED PAS MTHO SRID RTZER SKYES KYANG DMA' DMYAL BA'I ZANGS KHA NA YOD PA DANG KHYAD MED PA YIN,
Or let's say lastly you can reach a birth as a being of pleasure in one of the
higher two of the three realms of existence. These beings have no overt pain
at all, but still by the very nature of life possess the most subtle form of
suffering: the ever-present suffering of instant-by-instant aging. And these
beings are totally helpless to keep themselves in their paradise; there always

comes a day when the power of their past good deeds, which threw them there
in the first place, finally runs dry. Then they touch the energy of one of their
past bad deeds, and are forced to a lower birth. So you see, it doesn't really
matter what wonderful things might come to you in the circle of life--none of
them is stable, none of them is worth your trust. The very highest form of
existence, that rare meditation level we call the "peak of life," is not the least
bit better than the very lowest we can reach--hanging over a pot of molten
steel in hell, about to be dipped in.

SDUG BSNGAL SPYIR BSAM PA LA LAM RIM CHEN MOR SDUG BSNGAL BRGYAD BSAM PA DANG , DRUG BSAM PA, GSUM BSAM PA RNAMS GSUNGS KYANG DANG PO BRGYAD NI MI LA SBYAR, PHYI MA GSUM MJUG BSDU LA GSUNGS PAS, DES NA SDUG BSNGAL DRUG BSAM PA LA   
Lord Tsongkapa, in his great exposition on the Steps of the path to
Buddhahood, divides the contemplation of life's general sufferings into three
sections. These are contemplating the eight sufferings, the six sufferings, and
the three sufferings. The group of eight though applies more to life as a
human, and the group of three is given as sort of a summary. Here then we'll
speak some of how to do the contemplation on the six sufferings.121

   SDUG BSNGAL DRUG NI, NGES PA MED PA'I NYES PA, NGOMS PA MED PA'I NYES PA, LUS YANG NAS YANG DU 'DOR BA'I NYES PA, YANG YANG NYING MTSAMS SBYOR BA'I NYES PA, YANG YANG MTHO DMAN DU 'GYUR BA'I DE, GROGS MED PA'I DE BCAS   
These six are as follows:
1) The problem that life has no certainty.
2) The problem that we always want more than we have.
3) The problem that we have to keep shucking off bodies,
over and over again.
4) The problem that we have to keep going into a new
life, over and over again.
5) The problem that we go up and down in our fortunes
in life, over and over again.
6) The problem that no one can come along with us;
ultimately we are alone.

LAM RIM LTAR YIN, 'JIG RTEN 'DI NA 'DOD PAS MI NGOMS PA 'DI LAS SKYON CHE BA MI 'DUG CES RGYAL PO NGA LAS NUS KYANG ZHAL CHEMS SU MDZAD, RANG RE RAB BYUNG RNAMS LA KLOG PA THOS BSAM DANG , SPONG BA BSAM GTAN TE BYA BA 'DI GNYIS LAS MED,
These six problems are described at length in the standard works on the Steps
to Buddhahood. We should remember though King Mefeed, whose last words
were "There is no greater evil in the world than the fact that we always want
more than we have."122
You and I are monks, and there are only two things
we should be doing:
Read the holy books, get teaching on them,
contemplate their meaning.
Live a life of rejection, and stay in
meditation.

SPONG BA ZHES TSUL KHRIMS BSRUNG BA LA BYA, 'DI GNYIS LAS MI 'DA' BA ZHIG BYUNG NA MKHAS PA DANG GRUB THOB GNYIS KA 'DZOMS PA ZHIG 'ONG , 'DI GNYIS MED NA DON MANG BA, BYA BA MANG BA LA SHOR NAS CHOS GANG YANG MI 'BYUNG , DE YANG 'DOD CHUNG CHOG SHES MA BSTEN PA'I SKYON RED,
Here a "life of rejection" means a life where we keep our morality, and reject
bad deeds. If we can keep from going beyond these two activities, then one
day we can become both wise and realized. If though we neglect these two,
we will lose ourselves to what they call "lots of things to think about and lots
of things to do." And then we won't do any spiritual practice at all. People
make this mistake, by the way, because they are unable to stick to the precept
of "Keep your wants few; be easy to satisfy."123

'DIR SDUG BSNGAL GSUM GSUNGS PAS, ZAG BCAS KYI TSOR BA SDUG BSNGAL THAMS CAD SDUG BSNGAL GYI SDUG BSNGAL DANG ,
Since the three types of suffering are mentioned later on in our root text, we'll
describe them briefly. All impure feelings of pain constitute the first type of
suffering: the "suffering of suffering."

ZAG BCAS KYI TSOR BA BDE BA THAMS CAD 'GYUR BA'I SDUG BSNGAL YIN, DE NI DPER NA TSA BAS GDUNGS TSE BSIL BA DANG , GRANGS BAS GDUNGS TSE DRO BA DANG 'GRO SDOD SOGS LA BDE BAR SNANG YANG ,
All impure feelings of pleasure constitute the second type of suffering: the
"suffering of change." We can explain this suffering as follows. When you're
in a place that's very hot, then something cool seems like pleasure. When
you're in a place that's very cold, then something warm seems like pleasure.
The same is true when you've had to walk a long way (sitting would seem a
pleasure), or had to sit for a long time (walking would seem a pleasure).

DE BDE BA RANG MTSAN PA STE NGO BO NYID KYI BDE BA MA YIN TE DE YIN NA DA DUNG JI TZAM BSTEN KYANG BDE BA CHE RU 'GRO DGOS PA LA DE MI 'GRO BAR SLAR DE LAS SDUG BSNGAL 'BYUNG BA DE BDE BA RANG MTSAN PA MIN PA'I RTAGS RED, 'GYUR BA'I SDUG BSNGAL YANG DE LA ZER,
None of these things that seem to be pleasure though is pleasure by nature, or
pleasure in its very essence. If they were, then you would feel more pleasant
the more you had of them. But this is not the case, for as you get more and
more of them they too start to give you pain. When this happens we can
understand that they are not pleasure by nature. They are, in fact,
suffering--they are what we call the "suffering of change."

RIGS DRUG GANG DU SKYES KYANG SO SO'I NYER LEN GYI LUS GRUB TZAM NAS DE DANG DE'I SDUG BSNGAL RANG CHAS SU YOD PA NI KHYAB PA 'DU BYED KYI SDUG BSNGAL YIN, NYER LEN GYI PHUNG PO 'DI GRUB PHYIN CHAD TSE 'DI'I SKYE RGA NA 'CHI LA SOGS PA'I SDUG BSNGAL TSANG MA YONG SA'I RTEN BYED, TSE 'DI PHYI GNYIS KAR SDUG BSNGAL GYI SDUG BSNGAL DANG ,
'GYUR BA'I SDUG BSNGAL GNYIS 'DREN BYED KYI SNOD LTA BUR BYED PAS NA, ZAG BCAS NYER LEN GYI PHUNG PO'I SKYE BA LEN MI DGOS PA ZHIG MA BYUNG NA TSER MA'I MAL DU NYAL BA LTAR SDUG BSNGAL KHO NA LAS MED,
The third type of suffering is known as the "pervasive suffering, which brings
in more." The point here is that, regardless which one of the six kinds of birth
we take, we take on a body which, by its very existence, comes complete with
its own particular sufferings built in. From the first moment we take the
various impure parts of our being on, from the first moment of their existence,
they provide a basis for all the sufferings we have to look forward to in life:
birth, aging, sickness, death, and all the rest. The impure parts of ourselves are
like a big pot, sucking in the suffering of suffering, sucking in the suffering of
change, in both this and our future lives. We must find a way to stop taking
births, to stop taking on all the impure parts we're made of. Until we do, our
existence will be like lying on a bed of upright needles--never a thing but
pain.

'KHOR BA LAS THAR ZHES PA YANG LUNG PA GCIG NAS GZHAN ZHIG TU THAR BA LTA BU LA MI ZER GYI, 'KHOR BA NI ZAG BCAS NYER LEN GYI PHUNG PO'I RGYUN NAM CHA DE LA BYA BAS, DE BDAG MED RTOGS PA'I SHES RAB KYIS RTZA BA NAS RGYUN BCAD PA NA 'KHOR BA LAS THAR BA ZHES ZER BA YIN,
When we talk about "escaping cyclic life," it's not like running away from one
country and managing to reach another. "Cyclic life" is precisely the continued
existence of, the very fact of, the impure parts that make us up, the impure
parts of our being that we've taken on. And when the continued existence of
these parts is stopped at its root by the wisdom that realizes that nothing has
a self-nature, this then is our "escape from cyclic life."

DES PHYI MA'I SNANG SHAS LDOG TSUL BSHAD ZIN NAS,
This completes our explanation of how to stop desire for your future lives.

X. How to Know When You've Found Renunciation

GSUM PA NGES 'BYUNG DE SKYES PA'I TSAD NI,
The third and final section of our explanation of renunciation describes the
point at which we can say a person has succeeded in developing it; as the next
verse of the root text reads,

,DE LTAR GOMS PAS 'KHOR BA'I PHUN TSOGS LA,
,YID SMON SKAD CIG TZAM YANG MI SKYE ZHING ,
,NYIN MTSAN KUN TU THAR PA DON GNYER BLO,
,BYUNG NA DE TSE NGES 'BYUNG SKYES PA LAGS,
,ZHES PAS BSTAN,
(5)
When you've meditated thus and feel not even
A moment's wish for the goods things of cyclic life,
And when you begin to think both night and day
Of achieving freedom, you've found renunciation.

DE LTAR MI RTAG PA DANG , NGAN SONG DANG , LAS 'BRAS DANG , BDE 'GRO'I SDUG BSNGAL RNAMS BSAMS PAS, 'KHOR BA 'DI LAS GTAN NAS THAR PA ZHIG MA BYUNG PHYIN LHA'I BDE SKYID THOB KYANG SDUG BSNGAL KHO NA LAS SNYING PO MED PAR MTHONG BA MA ZAD   
Suppose you've contemplated thus, on the points already mentioned: your
impermanence, the births of misery, the principles of actions and their
consequences, and the sufferings of the happier births. And because of this
you see for yourself that it's all meaningless: that even if you could achieve the
kind of happiness that pleasure-beings enjoy in their paradises, it's really
nothing but suffering; that until you can escape forever from cyclic life, this is
the only way it will be.

TSANGS PA BRGYA BYIN DANG 'KHOR LOS SGYUR BA'I RGYAL PO'I DPAL 'BYOR LA'ANG YID SMON SKAD CIG TZAM YANG MI SKYE ZHING , NYIN MTSAN KUN TU ZHES PA DPER NA, SEMS KHRAL CHEN PO YOD PA'I MI DES MTSAN MO GNYID NAM SAD RES KYANG DE LHANG LHANG DRAN PA LTAR NAM BSAMS KYANG NGAM NGAM SHUGS KYIS THAR PA DON GNYER GYI BLO BCOS MA MA YIN PA SKYES PA NI NGES 'BYUNG SKYES PA'I TSAD YIN,
And then it comes even stronger: in your heart, you feel not even a moment's
wish even for the fantastic riches of the god-like beings they call Pure-one and
Hundred-Gift; you feel no wish even for the wealth of a Wheel Emperor, who
rules the world. And then a certain thought comes to your mind both "night
and day"; that is, in every conscious minute, the thought rushes into your mind
on its own--the way a man with some great worry on his mind remembers his
problem all in a rush, every time he wakes up during the night. When you
begin to think this way of achieving freedom, when you genuinely want freedom
this way, well then you know you've found renunciation.

LAM GTZO 'DIR DAL 'BYOR RNYED DKA' NAS NGES 'BYUNG GI BAR GYI CHUNG 'BRING GI LAM RNAMS NGES 'BYUNG GI KHONGS SU BSDU BA NI GZHUNG 'DI'I KHYAD CHOS RED, NGES 'BYUNG NI SNYING RJE CHEN PO'I RGYU THUN MONG MA YIN PAS SNYING RJE 'DI 'ONG BA LA SNGON DU NGES 'BYUNG GI BSAM PA BCOS MA MA YIN PA ZHIG SKYE DGOS, RANG SDUG BSNGAL GYIS MNAR TSUL BSAMS PAS BA SPU G-YO 'GUL MED PA ZHIG LA SEMS CAN GZHAN SDUG BSNGAL GYIS MNAR BA LA MI BZOD PA'I SNYING RJE 'ONGS MED DE, SPYOD 'JUG LAS,
Now the standard texts on the Steps to Buddhahood have sections ranging
from the teaching on the difficulty of finding leisure and fortune, on up to
instructions on renunciation, all included under the two headings of "paths for
practicioners of lesser scope" and "paths for practicioners of medium scope."
Here in the Three Principal Paths though, they all come under the one heading
of "renunciation." This is a unique feature of this work, and there is a reason
for it. Renunciation is the one special cause that brings you what we call

"great compassion"; to get this compassion, you must first find true thoughts
of renunciation. Great compassion is a state of mind where you can absolutely
no longer bear to see other beings tormented by the sufferings of life; there's
no way you can achieve it as long as your concern about the way life torments
you yourself is so feeble that it couldn't blow down a single upright hair. As
the famous verses of The Bodhisattva's Life say,

,SEMS CAN DE DAG RNAMS LA SNGON,
,RANG GI DON DU 'DI 'DRA'I SEMS,
,RMI LAM DU YANG MA RMIS NA,
,GZHAN GYI DON DU GA LA SKYE,
,ZHES GSUNGS,
If people like these have never before
Even in the dreams they dream
Felt such a wish just for themselves,
Then how can it come to them for others?124

DE YANG RANG STENG DU BSGOM PA NGES 'BYUNG DANG , GZHAN STENG DU BSGOM PA SNYING RJE YIN,
Thus we can say that renunciation and compassion are the same state of mind,
just that one is developed by meditating on your own situation, and the other
by meditating on others' situation.

'DI SKYE BA LA 'JAM MGON TZONG KHA PA'I LEGS GSUNG BYANG CHUB LAM RIM LA THOS BSAM GYIS ZHUGS TE BLO SBYANG DGOS, RANG CAG RNAMS CHAGS SOGS NYON MONGS PA JE 'PHEL DU 'GRO BA 'DI SKYES BU CHUNG 'BRING GI LAM TZAM LA'ANG BLO MA SBYANGS PA'I SKYON YIN PAS,
To develop this compassion, we must undertake to study and contemplate the
Steps on the path to Buddhahood, that great teaching of the gentle protector
Tsongkapa, and thus gradually train our minds. People like you and I see our
feelings of desire, and our other mental afflictions, grow stronger day by day;

the problem is that we have not even been able to train our minds in the paths
for people of lesser and medium scopes of practice.

BLO GROS DANG LDAN PA RNAMS KYIS MNGON SHES DANG , RDZU 'PHRUL, GNAS SGO 'BYED ZER BA SOGS BON DANG MU STEGS PA LTA BUS KYANG BYA BAR NUS PA'I LOG CHOS LA YID MI PHYOGS PAR BSTAN PA SPYI'I GNAD LUNG SDE SNOD GSUM DANG , LAM BSLAB PA GSUM GYI SNYING PO BSDUS PA NI BYANG CHUB LAM RIM 'DI YIN PAS 'DI LA THOS BSAM SGOM GSUM BYA DGOS,
Intelligent people then should stop giving any thought to practicing mistaken
paths that any local shaman or follower of some deficient "religion" could
master: things like trying to develop extra-sensory powers, or the ability to
perform miraculous feats, or the so-called "opening day"--pay-as-you-go
religion. Discriminating people should instead learn, and contemplate, and
meditate upon the three collections of scripture (which contain the important
bulk of the teaching in general), and upon these Steps to Buddhahood (for they
are the collected essence of the path of the three trainings).125

LAM GYI RIM PA 'DI LA ZHUGS NA ZHI GNAS DANG LAM GTZO RNAM GSUM, SNGAGS KYI RIM PA GNYIS MAN CHAD 'KHRUL MED CIG RNYED DE 'ONG BAS SANGS RGYAS KYI GO 'PHANG THOB PA'I RE BA'ANG 'DI NAS BYAR YOD, SNYING RJE CHEN PO MA SKYES NA BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS RGYUD LA SKYE THABS MED PAS SNYING RJE CHEN PO RGYUD LA SKYE BA GAL CHE GSUNGS,
If you start off on these Steps, then you will never err, and will gradually gain
the high meditative state called "quietude," and the three principal paths, and
everything else on up to the two levels of the secret way. Any hope we have
of attaining Buddhahood then rests upon this very teaching. And we must
absolutely try to develop great compassion in our hearts; if we cannot develop
this compassion, our Lama concluded, then there is no way at all we can
develop the sublime wish to achieve Buddhahood, for the sake of every living
being.

Notes to Reading Six
108. the realms: See note 14.
109. Non-virtue brings all sufferings... Quotation from f. 116b of the Master's Jewel
Rosary, entry 3.
110. the three rare jewels: So named because they are supremely valuable and
infrequently found--the Buddha, defined as the ultimate shelter, a being who
has completed the highest possible good for himself and others; the Dharma,
realizations or the end of undesirable qualities within a person's mind; and the
Sangha, or any being who has perceived the true nature of reality directly.
111. the monk named Lekkar: He spent many years in the service of the Buddha
himself but failed miserably to understand his teachings. The dismaying story
is found in the twelfth chapter of the Total-Nirvana Sutra (ff. 285b-418b, vol.
2, entry 81) and references to it appear often in later literature: see for example
f. 136b of Pabongka Rinpoche's Liberation (entry 47); p. 161 of the great
Potowa's Jewels (entry 19); and f. 5a of the first Panchen Lama's Path of Bliss
(entry 50).
112. as well as Devadatta: A close relation of the Buddha who was driven by
jealousy to despise the Teacher. A "heap" of scriptures is sometimes described
as the amount you could write with the quantity of ink that Rabten, a fantastic
mythical elephant, could carry on his back. One sutra says that Devadatta
could recite enough scriptures to make 60,000 loads for the great elephant
"Incense." Numerous textual references to the story of the misled monk are
listed by Prof. Edgerton (p. 271, entry 92).
113. an appropriate antidote: Buddhism teaches that there are four antidote
forces, which together can remove the power of any bad deed. The "basis"
force consists of thinking who it was that was offended by your deed, and who
it is you will rely on to clear yourself of it. The "destruction" force is an
intense feeling of shame and regret for the deed, which will certainly return to
hurt you. The "reverse" force is to turn yourself away from doing that kind of
deed again. The "counteragent" force is to undertake some spiritual practice
--confession, meditation, or any good deed--to offset the power of the wrong
(see Pabongka Rinpoche, entry 47, ff. 109-113, 246-8).
114. the ten non-virtues: The ten non-virtues to be avoided in Buddhist practice
are said to be a very gross abbreviation of the many thousands that we do.
The ten include three by body (killing any being, stealing, and sexual

misconduct); four in speech (lying, divisive speech, harsh words, and idle talk);
and three within the mind (coveting others' things, thoughts to harm, and
wrong views such as believing that there is no connection between what you
do now and what you experience later).
115. realized being: Any person who has directly perceived "emptiness"; this will
be explained below in the section on correct view.
116. The path begins... Source of quotation not found.
117. Revive: The hell is so named because the inhabitants beat each other until
they all fall down senseless; then they revive and start to fight one another
again. The process is repeated over and over for thousands of years, until the
beings are finally able to die.
118. Word of the Gentle One: Counted among the principal works on the Steps
of the path to Buddhahood, and composed by the "Great Fifth" Dalai Lama,
Ngawang Lobsang Gyatso (1617- 1682); see entry 15. This same Dalai Lama
has written two commentaries on the Three Principal Paths (entries 16,17).
119. "Path of Bliss" and "Quick Path": The former work is another of the classic
explanations of the Steps to Buddhahood and was composed by the first of the
great Panchen Lamas, Lobsang Chukyi Gyeltsen (1570-1662), who was also the
tutor of the above-mentioned Fifth Dalai Lama. The latter treatise was written
in explanation of the first by Panchen Lama II, Lobsang Yeshe (see note 97, and
entries 50,54).
120. the fighting: It is said that the lesser pleasure beings are driven out of
attachment and jealousy to wage frequent war on their slightly more glorious
cousins, the full pleasure beings.
121. eight, six, and three types of suffering: The eight sufferings are being born,
getting older, getting sick, dying, encountering things that are unpleasant,
losing what is pleasant, trying and failing to get what you want, and the
suffering of simply being alive and having all the impure parts of ourselves
that we do (Lord Tsongkapa, entry 61, ff. 137- 151; Pabongka Rinpoche, entry
47, ff. 250-267). An explanation of the three sufferings follows in the text.
122. King Mefeed: A legendary king of yore who was said to have been born
spontaneously; he was named from the fact that the concubines of his father
competed to breast-feed the miraculous child and thereby become the Queen
Mother. His story is mentioned in many works; see Pabongka Rinpoche's
Liberation (f. 252a), as well as the list in Prof. Edgerton's Dictionary under the
king's Sanskrit name, Mandhata (p. 430, entry 92).

123. Keep your wants few... The dictum is expounded upon by the great
Buddhist philosopher Vasubandhu (c. 300 A.D.) in the sixth chapter of his
classic Treasure of Wisdom (see pp. 316- 7, entry 14).
124. If people like these... From the eloquent manual for bodhisattvas by the
Buddhist poet-philosopher Shantideva (695- 743 A.D.). Quotation on f. 3a,
entry 71.
125. three collections and three trainings: See note 64.

150
The Asian Classics Institute
Course I: The Principal Teachings of Buddhism
Reading Seven
THE SECOND PATH:
THE WISH TO ACHIEVE ENLIGHTENMENT
FOR EVERY LIVING BEING
XI. Why You Need the Wish for Enlightenment

GNYIS PA LA GSUM, SEMS BSKYED DGOS PA'I RGYU MTSAN, SEMS DE BSKYED PA'I TSUL, SEMS DE SKYES PA'I TSAD DO, , DANG PO NI,
We have now reached the second of the four parts in the actual body of the
text. This is an explanation of the wish to achieve enlightenment for the sake
of every living being. This explanation itself will include three sections: why
you need the wish for enlightenment, how to go about developing this wish,
and how to know when you've finally developed it. The next verse of the root
text tells us why we need this great wish:

,NGES 'BYUNG DE YANG RNAM DAG SEMS BSKYED KYIS,
,ZIN PA MED NA BLA MED BYANG CHUB KYI,
,PHUN TSOGS BDE BA'I RGYU RU MI 'GYUR BAS,
,BLO LDAN RNAMS KYIS BYANG CHUB SEMS MCHOG BSKYED,
,CES PAS BSTAN TE,
(6)
Renunciation though can never bring
The total bliss of matchless Buddhahood
Unless it's bound by the purest wish; and so,
The wise seek the high wish for enlightenment.

DE LTA BU'I NGES 'BYUNG GI BSAM PA SHUGS DRAG YOD KYANG , DGE BA GANG BYAS THAR PA'I RGYU LAS THAMS CAD MKHYEN PA'I RGYUR MI 'GRO STE, NGES 'BYUNG NI NYAN RANG LA'ANG YOD PAS SO, ,
You may be able to gain some fierce feelings of renunciation as we described
it above; any good deeds you do under their influence though can only bring
you an ordinary nirvana--they alone can never serve to bring you to
omniscient enlightenment. We can see this from the fact that even
practicioners of lower paths--people we call "listeners" and "self-made
victors"--can possess true renunciation.126

DES NA 'TSANG RGYA BA LA THOG MAR LAM GTZO GSUM DANG , DE'I NANG NAS KYANG BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS 'DI SKYE DGOS, BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS RIN PO CHE 'DI MED NA MNGON SHES DANG RDZU 'PHRUL SOGS JI TZAM YOD KYANG THEG CHEN PA'I GRAL DU MI TSUD CING , SEMS CAN THAMS CAD SRID ZHI'I RGUD PA MTHA' DAG LAS DGROL BA'I BYANG CHUB KYI RGYUR GTAN NAS MI 'GRO BAS PHUN TSOGS BDE BA'I RGYUR MI 'GYUR,
For full enlightenment then a person needs to develop within his mind all
three of the principal paths--and more specifically, he must have gained the
second path: the wish to achieve enlightenment for every living being. You
may possess extra-sensory powers, you may be able to perform miracles, you
may have any number of fantastic qualities--but unless you have this precious
jewel in your heart, you will never enter that select group of people who
practice the greater way. Without this highest wish, none of your qualities will
ever bring you total bliss--none of them, none of them at all, will bring you
Buddhahood: the ability to free each and every living being from all the
troubles of cyclic life, and from those of a lower escape from cyclic life.127

NYAN RANG DGRA BCOM PA RNAMS LA STONG NYID MNGON SUM DU RTOGS PA SOGS YON TAN GSER GYI RI LTA BU YOD KYANG LAM DES 'TSANG MI RGYA BA NI BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS MED PAS LAN PA YIN,
Those great practitioners of the lower paths--"enemy destroyers" of the
"listener" or "self-made" type--possess fine qualities like a huge mountain
made of pure gold; even such qualities as the ability to perceive emptiness
directly. But these paths never bring them to Buddhahood. Why? Because
they lack the wish to achieve enlightenment for every living being.128

BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS 'DI YOD NA, SPYOD 'JUG DANG , 'JUG PA, DKON BRTZEGS SOGS LAS GSUNGS PA LTAR 'GRO BA LHA MI DANG BCAS PAS PHYAG BYA BA'I 'OS SU 'GYUR BA DANG , NYAN RANG RIGS KYI SGO NAS ZIL GYIS GNON PA DANG , GANG ZAG DES DGE BA THA NA BYA ROG LA ZAN CHANG GCIG SBYIN PA TSUN CHAD THEG PA CHEN PO'I CHOS SU 'GRO ,
If you do gain this great wish, you become a person who truly deserves to
have the entire world--with all its different kinds of beings up to humans and
gods--bow down at your feet, just as holy books like The Bodhisattva's Life, and
Entering the Middle Way, and The Rare Stack describe it.129
You find yourself in
a different class of being, and then you completely outshine listeners and self-
made victors--practitioners of the lower paths. Every virtuous act you do,
even down to throwing a scrap of food to some wild bird, becomes a practice
of the greater way; becomes a cause for your future Buddhahood; becomes the
way of life of a bodhisattva.

SANGS RGYAS BA'I RGYUR 'GRO , RGYAL SRAS KYI SPYOD PAR 'GRO , SEMS 'DI YOD PA'I GANG ZAG DE LA PHYOGS BCU'I SANGS RGYAS RNAMS KYIS SRAS DANG 'DRA BAR DGONGS, BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA' CHEN PO RNAMS KYIS KYANG SPUN DANG 'DRA BAR DGONGS PA YIN,
If a person possesses this holy wish to achieve enlightenment for the sake of
every living being, then all the countless Buddhas in all the ten directions of
space look upon him as their son. And all the great bodhisattvas look upon
him as their brother.

DER MA ZAD THEG CHEN LA ZHUGS MA ZHUGS DANG , TSE GCIG LA 'TSANG RGYA MI RGYA YANG BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS YOD MED LA RAG LAS PAS SANGS RGYAS KYI GO 'PHANG 'DOD NA BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS LA BLO SBYONG DGOS PA YIN GSUNGS,
But that's not all; the whole question of whether you have reached the greater
way, and the whole question of whether you will be able to achieve
Buddhahood in this one short life, depend on whether you have truly gained
this wish. So if you want enlightenment, our Lama concluded, you must train
your thoughts in the wish.

Notes to Reading Seven
126. listeners and self-made victors: Practicioners who have not yet developed the
highest motivation of attaining Buddhahood for the sake of all beings.
"Listeners" are so named because they can listen to the higher teachings and
relate them to others, but not practice these instructions themselves.
"Self-made victors" can reach their goal without relying on a spiritual guide in
this life, although only because of extensive instruction by countless teachers
in their past lives.
127. a lower escape: See note 83.
128. "enemy destroyers": Those who have permanently defeated the enemy of
mental afflictions--such as desire, anger, and ignorance--and have therefore
achieved nirvana. See also note 83.
129. "The Bodhisattva's Life," "Entering the Middle Way," and "The Rare Stack":
Master Shantideva's manual for bodhisattvas has been listed at note 124. The
classic text on correct view by Master Chandrakirti, the illustrious 7th Century
Indian philosopher of Buddhism, will be covered below with the third of the
principal paths. In each case, the benefits of the wish for enlightenment appear
in the opening verses. The Rare Stack is a separate section of the Buddhist
canon containing some 49 different sutras. One often quoted in explanations
of the wish for Buddhahood is The Chapter of Light Protector (entry 75); it
contains eloquent descriptions of the benefits of the wish throughout, and the
section around f. 237 is particularly relevant here.

155
The Asian Classics Institute
Course I: The Principal Teachings of Buddhism
Reading Eight
XII. How to Develop the Wish for Enlightenment

GNYIS PA SEMS DE BSKYED PA'I TSUL NI,
The second section in our explanation of the wish to achieve enlightenment for
every living being describes how to develop this wish. As the next two verses
say,
 , SHUGS DRAG CHU BO BZHI YI RGYUN GYIS KHYER,
,BZLOG DKA' LAS KYI 'CHING BA DAM POS BSDAMS,
,BDAG 'DZIN LCAGS KYI DRA BA'I SPUBS SU TSUD,
,MA RIG MUN PA'I SMAG CHEN KUN NAS 'THIBS,
,MU MED SRID PAR SKYE ZHING SKYE BA RU,
,SDUG BSNGAL GSUM GYIS RGYUN CHAD MED PAR MNAR,
,GNAS SKABS 'DI 'DRAR GYUR PA'I MA RNAMS KYI,
,NGANG TSUL BSAMS NAS SEMS MCHOG BSKYED BAR MDZOD,
,CES PAS BSTAN,
(7,8)
They're swept along on four fierce river currents,
Chained up tight in past deeds, hard to undo,
Stuffed in a steel cage of grasping "self,"
Smothered in the pitch-black ignorance.
In a limitless round they're born, and in
their births
Are tortured by three sufferings without a break;
Think how your mothers feel, think of what's
happening
To them: try to develop this highest wish.

DE YANG SPYOD 'JUG LAS,
,SEMS CAN RNAMS KYI KLAD NAD TZAM,
,BSAL LO SNYAM DU BSAM NA YANG ,
,PHAN 'DOGS BSAM PA DANG LDAN PAS,
,BSOD NAMS DPAG MED LDAN GYUR NA,
,SEMS CAN RE RE'I MI BDE BA,
,DPAG TU MED PA BSAL 'DOD CING ,
,RE RE'ANG YON TAN DPAG MED DU,
,BSGRUB PAR 'DOD PA SMOS CI DGOS,
,ZHES DANG ,
We may begin with another pair of verses, from The Bodhisattva's Life:
Even just wishing you could stop
A headache another person has
Can bring you merit without measure
Because of the helpful intent you feel.
What need then to mention the wish
That you could stop the immeasurable pain
Of every being, and put every one
In a state of measureless happiness?130

DPA' BYIN GYIS ZHUS PA'I MDO LAS,
,BYANG CHUB SEMS KYI BSOD NAMS GANG ,
,DE LA GAL TE GZUGS MCHIS NA,
,NAM MKHA'I KHAMS NI KUN GANG STE,
,DE NI DE BAS LHAG PAR 'GYUR,
The Sutra that Viradatta Requested says as well,
Were the merit of the wish for enlightenment
To take on some kind of physical form
It would fill the reaches of space itself
And then spill over farther still.131

,ZHES SOGS BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS BSKYED PA'I PHAN YON MTHA' YAS PAR GSUNGS PA LTAR MA SEMS CAN RNAMS SDUG BSNGAL SHUGS DRAG PA 'DOD PA'I CHU BO, LTA BA'I CHU BO, SRID PA'I CHU BO, MA RIG PA'I CHU BO STE RGYU DUS KYI CHU BO BZHI DANG , SKYE BA, RGA BA, NA BA, 'CHI BA STE 'BRAS DUS KYI CHU BO BZHI'I RGYUN GYI PHYOGS SU KHYER ZHING ,
The benefits of this wish to achieve enlightenment for all living beings are thus
described, in these and other texts, as limitless. And so here are the mass of
living beings, all of them our mothers, swept along the flow of four river
currents, all fierce suffering. From one viewpoint, while they are acting as

causes, these four are the torrent of desire, the torrent of views, the torrent of
the ripe force of deeds, and the torrent of ignorance. Later, when they serve
as results, they are the four torrents of birth, and aging, and illness, and death.
 CHU BO'I RGYUN DE'I NANG DU KHYER YANG RKANG LAG RNAMS THAG PAS BSDAMS PA LTAR BZLOG DKA' BA LAS KYI ZHAGS PA'AM 'CHING BAS DAM POR BSDAMS,
And these mother beings are not just hurtling along in these four great rivers;
it's just as if their hands and feet too were bound fast--they are chained up
tight, they are snared, in their own past deeds, hard to undo.

DES KYANG MI TSAD PA SDOM BYED KYI THAG PA DE 'BRENG PA DANG RTZID THAG LTA BU MA YIN PAR GCOD DKA' BA'AM THAR DKA' BA LCAGS THAG GIS BSDAMS PA LTA BU'I BDAG 'DZIN LCAGS KYI DRA BA'I SBUBS SU TSUD,
But that's not all; the bonds which hold them tight are no regular ties, like our
twined ropes of yak-skin or hair. It's more like our mothers are clasped in
fetters of iron, ever so hard to sever, ever so hard to unshackle--for while they
are swept along they are stuffed in a steel cage of grasping to some non-existent
"self."

DER MA ZAD NYIN MO YIN NA GZHAN LA 'BOD PA DANG ROGS SBREL BA TSUN CHAD KYI RE BA ZHIG BYA RGYU YOD KYANG , DE LTAR MIN PAR MTSAN MO NAM GUNG MUN PA'I SMAG RUM NAS CHU BO'I GZHUNG DU KHYER BA LTA BU'I MA RIG PA'I MUN PA'I SMAG CHEN GYIS KUN NAS GTIBS SHING ,
And there's more. If there were some daylight, these mother beings would
have some glimmer of hope--they could at least cry out, and try to get some
help. But it is night, and the darkest hour of the night, and in pitch-black dark
they are swept downstream the mighty river: they are smothered completely in
pitch-black ignorance.

MTHA' MED MU MED KYI SRID PA'I RGYA MTSOR SKYE ZHING SKYE BA LA SDUG BSNGAL GYI SDUG BSNGAL, 'GYUR BA'I SDUG BSNGAL, KHYAB PA 'DU BYED KYI SDUG BSNGAL GSUM GYIS RGYUN CHAD MED PAR DUS RTAG TU MNAR NAS   
In a limitless round, in an endless round, they are born into the ocean of life, and
in these births they are tortured by three different kinds of suffering: the suffering
of suffering, the suffering of change, and the all-pervading suffering. And
their torture comes to them without a break--it is always there.

   SDUG BSNGAL BZOD PAR DKA' BA'I GNAS SKABS 'DI 'DRAR GYUR KYANG , MA RANG GI NGOS NAS NI BYA THABS MED LA, DE LAS 'DON PA'I KHUR BU RANG LA BABS SHING , 'DON PA'I THABS DA LTA RANG LA BSGRUB TU YOD PAS NA, MA RNAMS SDUG BSNGAL GYIS MNAR BA'I NGANG TSUL BSAMS NAS DE LAS SGROL BA'I KHUR 'KHYER BA'I LHAG BSAM SOGS LA RIM GYIS BLO SBYANGS TE BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS RIN PO CHE SKYE BA'I THABS LA 'BAD DGOS,
This is what's happening to them, to our mother beings, this is their situation:
unbearable pain. There's nothing they can do like this to help themselves; the
son though has a chance at hand to pull his mother free. He must find a way,
and find it now, to grasp her hand and draw her out. And the way he must
try is to develop this jewel wish for enlightenment: he must do so first by
thinking how his mothers feel, tortured by pain; then by deciding to take personal
responsibility, the duty of freeing them, upon himself; and so on, all in the
proper stages.

DE SKYE BA LA BSAM DGOS, BSAM PA LA THOS DGOS PA YIN, SEMS CAN THAMS CAD BDE BA DANG LDAN 'DOD LHANG LHANG YOD PA BYAMS PA DANG , SDUG BSNGAL DANG BRAL 'DOD LHANG LHANG YOD PA SNYING RJE, DE YANG SHIN TU GCES PA'I BU GCIG PU NAD KYIS ZIN PA'I 
MA DES SPYOD LAM THAMS CAD DU BU DE NAD LAS MYUR DU GROL THABS SHIG BYUNG NA CI MA RUNG SNYAM PA RGYUN CHAD MED PAR NGAM NGAM SHUGS KYIS BLO LA LHANG LHANG YOD PA LTA BU NI SNYING RJE CHEN PO SKYES PA'I TSAD YIN,
To actually gain the wish for enlightenment he must first contemplate it. To
contemplate it, he must first learn about it from another. "Loving-kindness" is
an almost obsessive desire that each and every living being find happiness.
"Compassion" is an almost obsessive desire that they be free of any pain.
Think of how a mother feels when her one and only and most beloved son is
in the throes of a serious illness. Wherever she goes, whatever she does, she
is always thinking how wonderful it would be if she could find some way of
freeing him quickly from his sickness. These thoughts come to her mind in a
steady stream, without a break, and all of their own, automatically. They
become an obsession with her. When we feel this way towards every living
being, and only then, we can say we have gained what they call "great
compassion."

SANGS RGYAS KYI BSTAN PA 'DI LA BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS RIN PO CHE LA BLO SBYONG TSUL RGYU 'BRAS MAN NGAG BDUN DANG , BDAG GZHAN MNYAM BRJE GNYIS YOD, DE GNYIS GANG GI SGO NAS BLO SBYANG NA'ANG BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS NGES PAR SKYE, DE SBYONG BA'I THABS TSANG LA MA NOR BA, SA STENG 'DI NA 'GRAN ZLA DANG BRAL BA NI 'JAM MGON TZONG KHA PA CHEN PO'I BSTAN PA'I SNYING PO BYANG CHUB LAM GYI RIM PA 'DI YIN PAS 'DI'I SGO NAS BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS LA BLO SBYANG DGOS,
Here in the teachings of the Buddha there are two methods given for training
one's mind in this precious jewel, the wish for enlightenment. The first is
known as the "seven-part, cause-and-effect instruction." The second we call
"exchanging self and others." No matter which of the two you use to train
your mind, you can definitely gain the wish for enlightenment. The way to
train oneself in the wish, the way which is complete and which never errs, the
way unmatched by any other here upon this earth, is the instruction of the
Steps of the path to Buddhahood, the very essence of all the teachings of our
gentle protector, the great Tsongkapa. Thus you should train your mind in the
wish for enlightenment by using this very instruction.

BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS SBYONG TSUL MDOR BSDUS NA, THOG MAR BTANG SNYOMS DANG , DE NAS MAR SHES SOGS NAS RIM GYIS BSGOM, MAR SHES, DRIN DRAN, DRIN GZO GSUM NI YID 'ONG GI BYAMS PA'I RGYU DANG , YID 'ONG GI BYAMS PA NI DE GSUM GYI 'BRAS BU DANG , SNYING RJE CHEN PO'I RGYU YIN,
Here we'll give just a brief summary of how one trains himself in the wish to
achieve enlightenment for every living being. The start-off is to practice
feelings of neutrality towards all beings; after that, one begins meditation on
each of the steps from "mother recognition" on up. The first three steps are to
recognize all beings as one's mothers, to feel gratitude for their kindness, and
to wish to repay that kindness. These three act as a cause for what we call
"beautiful" loving-kindness. This type of loving-kindness is itself the fourth
step; it is both an effect brought about by the first three, and a cause for the
fifth: great compassion.

BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS SHUGS DRAG YOD MED KYANG SNYING RJE CHEN PO SHUGS CHE CHUNG GIS 'BYUNG BA YIN, SNYING RJE MA SKYES NA SKYE BA'I THABS BLA MA SPYAN RAS GZIGS KYI RNAL 'BYOR BSGOM, GSOL BA 'DEBS, SPYAN RAS GZIGS KYI THUGS DANG RANG SEMS DBYER MED DU BSRE BA'I RNAL 'BYOR LA 'BAD NA BYIN RLABS ZHUGS TE SNYING RJE CHEN PO SKYE BA LA KHYAD CHE BA MAN NGAG YIN, ZAB GNAD GZHAN 'GA' RE YOD KYANG TSOGS SU MI 'CHAD GSUNGS,
The relative intensity of one's wish for enlightenment depends on the intensity
of one's feeling of great compassion. If you find it difficult to develop
compassion, you can practice the meditation known as "Lama Loving-Gaze" to
help you gain it. If you make good efforts to perform this meditation and the
proper supplications, as well as the practice where you visualize that your
mind and that of Loving-Gaze are mixed inseparably, then you can gain a
blessing for it.132
This is a very special personal instruction for developing
great compassion. There were, our Lama explained, a number of other
profound points in this regard--but he would not detail them in a public
gathering.

SNYING RJE CHEN PO SKYES PA NA GZHAN DON KHUR DU 'KHYER BA'I LHAG BSAM SKYE, DE LAS BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS SKYE BA YIN,
Once you develop great compassion, then you can develop the extraordinary
form of personal responsibility, where you take upon yourself the load of
working for others' benefit. And the wish to achieve enlightenment for every
living being comes from this.

DE YANG BTANG SNYOMS SGOM PA LA THOG MAR DGRA GNYEN GANG YANG MA YIN PA'I BAR MA'I SEMS CAN ZHIG LA CHAGS SDANG GI SEMS SNYOMS, DE NAS RANG GI YID LA 'BAB PA'I GNYEN ZHIG DANG , YID DU MI 'ONG BA'I DGRA GNYIS MDUN DU BSAM STE, GNYEN 'DIS KYANG TSE RABS MANG POR DGRAR SKYES TE GNOD PA BYAS, DGRA 'DIS KYANG TSE RABS MANG POR GNYEN DU GYUR NAS PHAN BTAGS TSUL BSAM STE CHAGS SDANG GI SEMS SNYOMS,
The meditation on neutrality goes like this. First you put your thoughts in an
even state, free of feelings of like and dislike, by thinking about someone who
is for you a neutral figure: neither your enemy nor your friend. Then you
imagine that two people are sitting before you: one of your best-loved friends,
and one of your ugliest enemies. Next you think very carefully about how the
friend has, in many of your previous lives, taken birth as your enemy and hurt
you. You think too about how the enemy has, in so many of your past lives,
taken birth as your friend and helped you. This puts your mind in the even
state, free of feelings of like and dislike.

DE NAS SEMS CAN THAMS CAD KYANG RANG RANG GI NGOS NAS BDE BA 'DOD PA'ANG MNYAM, SDUG BSNGAL MI 'DOD PA'ANG MNYAM, DE THABS CAD RANG GI DGRA GNYEN GNYIS KA LAN GRANGS MANG PO BYAS PA'ANG MNYAM NA, SU LA NI CHAGS PAR BYA, SU LA NI SDANG BAR BYA 
SNYAM DU MKHA' KHYAB KYI SEMS CAN THAMS CAD LA SEMS SNYOMS PA MA SKYES KYI BAR DU BSAM DGOS,
You go on then to think about how all living beings are equal in that, from his
own point of view, each one of them wants to be happy. They are equal too
in not wanting pain. And they are equal in that every one has acted as both
my enemy and my friend, many many times. So who am I supposed to like?
And who am I supposed to dislike? You have to keep on practicing this way
until, one day, you gain neutral feelings towards all sentient beings, as vast in
extent as space itself.

MAR SHES SGOM PA LA RNAM 'GREL LAS GSUNGS PA'I RIG PA'I YA MTHA' THUG MED DU SGRUB PA'I RIGS PA 'DI SBYAR NA MAR SHES SKYE BA LA PHAN CHE BAS 'DIR MDOR BSDU NA,
The next step is the meditation where you recognize that every living being is
your mother. Gaining this recognition is much easier if you apply the line of
reasoning mentioned in the Commentary on Valid Perception for demonstrating
the infinite regression of one's awareness. We'll present this reasoning here,
in brief.133

RANG GI DE RING GI RIG PA 'DI KHA SANG GI RIG PA'I RIG RGYUN DANG , DA LO'I RIG PA 'DI LO SNGA MA'I RIG PA'I RIG RGYUN YIN PA BZHIN DU, RANG GI TSE 'DI'I RIG PA 'DI TSE SNGA MA'I RIG PA'I RIG RGYUN DANG , TSE SNGA MA'I RIG PA DE YANG DE'I TSE SNGA MA SNGA MA'I RIG RGYUN YIN PAS DE GA NANG BZHIN PHAR DED NA 'DI PHAN CHAD DU MED BYA BA GTAN NAS MED PAR RIG PA'I YA MTHA' THUG MED DU 'GRUB CING ,
Your awareness of today is a mental continuation of the awareness you had
yesterday. This year's awareness is a mental continuation of the awareness
you had the year before. Just so, your awareness over this entire life is a
mental continuation of the awareness you had in your former life. The
awareness you had in your former life was, in turn, a mental continuation of
the awareness you had in the life before that. You can continue back in a
regression like this and absolutely never reach some point where you can say,
"Prior to this, I had no awareness." This then proves the infinite regression of
one's awareness.

DE BZHIN DU RANG GI 'KHOR BA LA THOG MA'I MTHA' MED PAS SKYE BA LA YA MTHA' MED, SA PHYOGS 'DIR MA SKYES BYA BA MED, SA PHYOGS RE RE LA'ANG GRANGS MED PA RE SKYES, SEMS CAN 'DI LTA BU'I LUS MA BLANGS BYA BA MED, BLANGS PA RE RE'ANG GRANGS MED PA RE BLANGS, KHYI GCIG BU'I SKYE BA BLANGS PA'ANG GRANGS KYIS MI CHOD, SEMS CAN THAMS CAD LA DE LTAR YIN,
My own circle of life then must also be beginningless, and the births I have
taken as well can have no starting point. There exists no place where I have
never taken birth. I have taken birth in every single place, countless times.
There exists no creature whose body I have not worn. I have worn every kind
of body, countless times. Just the lives I have taken as a dog are themselves
beyond any number to count. And the same is true for every living being.

DES NA SEMS CAN 'DIS RANG GI MA MA BYAS BYA BA GCIG KYANG MED, SEMS CAN RE RES KYANG RANG GI MA GRANGS MED PA RE BYAS PA SHA STAG YIN, MI GCIG PU'I RTEN LA RANG GI MA BYAS PA'ANG GRANGS KYIS MI CHOD PAS,
Therefore there exists no being who has never been my mother. Absolutely
every single one of them has been my mother a countless number of times.
Even the number of times that each has been my mother in just my births as
a human is past all counting too.

DE LTAR SEMS CAN THAMS CAD KYIS RANG GI MA GRANGS MED PA RE YANG DANG YANG DU BYAS TSUL LA NGES SHES SHUGS DRAG MA SKYES BAR YANG NAS YANG DU BSGOM,
Do this meditation over and over until you gain a deepfelt certainty that each
and every living being has been your mother, over and over, countless times.
 DE NAS DRIN DRAN TSUL LA, RANG GI TSE 'DI'I MA LA MTSON NA, RANG AA MA'I MNGAL DU CHAGS PA NAS BZUNG STE BU LA GNOD KYIS DOGS NAS ZAS SPYOD KHA 'DZEM PA TSUN CHAD 
NAD PA NANG BZHIN GYI DKA' SPYAD LHUR BLANGS, MA RANG GI GZUGS PO NAD PA NYAM THAG PA'I LUS LTAR GOM PA CHE BA ZHIG KYANG 'DOR MA PHOD PAR ZLA BA DGU DANG ZHAG BCU'I RING RANG AA MA'I MNGAL DU NYAR,
Developing a sense of gratitude is the next step, and you can start by taking
your mother in this present life. She began her hardships for me while I was
still in her womb, gladly taking it upon herself to avoid anything she felt might
hurt me--even down to the food she ate--treating herself with care, as though
she were sick. For nine months and ten days she carried me in her womb,
looking at her own body as though it belonged to someone else, someone very
ill, and hesitating even to take big steps.

PHYIR SKYES PA'I TSE'ANG MA RANG LA NA TSA DANG SDUG BSNGAL TSAD MED PAS GNOD TSABS CHEN PO DE TZAM BYUNG YANG , DA DUNG YID BZHIN GYI NOR BU RIN PO CHE RNYED PA LTAR DGA' TSOR CHEN PO BYAS,
As she gave me birth, my mother was torn with violent suffering, excruciating
pain, and yet still felt an overwhelming joy, as though she had discovered
some precious gem that would grant her any wish.

RANG DE DUS NGU RGYU DANG LAG PAS G-YAB TZAM G-YAB TZAM BYED PA LAS GZHAN GANG YANG MI SHES, CI YANG MI NUS PA'I, LKUGS PA, ZHA BO, BYI'U PHRUG KHA DMAR LTA BU ZHIG LAS MED PA LA AA MAS SOR MO BCU'I RTZE LA G-YENGS, SHA'I DROD LA SBYAR, BRTZE BA'I 'DZUM GYIS BSUS,
Right then I knew absolutely nothing more than to cry and wave my arms
around somehow. I was totally helpless. Totally stupid. Incapacitated.
Nothing more than some baby chick with a red-rubber beak still yet to harden.
But she swayed me on her fingertips, and pressed me to her body's warmth,
and greeted me with a smile of love.

DGA' BA'I MIG GIS BLTAS, SNABS KHAS PHYIS, MI GTZANG BA LAG PAS PHYIS, 'O MA'I SKYO MA SOGS KHAS BLUD, GNOD PA GANG NUS LAS BSRUNG , PHAN PA GANG NUS BSGRUB,
With joyful eyes she gazed on me, and wiped the snot from my face with her
lips, and cleaned my filthy shit with her hands. Sometimes she chewed my
food for me, and fed me things like milky porridge straight from her mouth
to mine. She did her best to protect me from any hurt. She did her best to get
me any good.

DE DAG GI SKABS SU RANG GI SKYID SDUG LEGS NYES TSANG MA THAMS CAD MA DE'I GDONG LA BLTAS TE MA DE GCIG PU LA RE BA BYAS NAS SDOD DGOS PA BYUNG , RANG DE DUS AA MAS DRIN GYIS MA BSKYANGS NA CHU TSOD GCIG KYANG MI SDOD DE, BYA DANG KHYI SOGS KYIS ZA 'GRO BA SOGS LAS, GSON POR YONG RGYU'I RE BA MED, RANG AA MAS NYIN RE LA YANG SROG MGO BRGYA BRGYA TZAM BTON PA'I DRIN YOD,
In those days I had to look to her for everything; good or bad, happy or sad,
all the hope I could have lay in one person: mother. But for her kindness, I
wouldn't have lasted an hour; they could have set me out in the open right
then and some birds or a dog would have come and made a meal of me--I'd
have no hope of coming out alive. Every single day she protected me from
harms that could have taken my life, no less than a hundred times. Such was
her kindness.

RANG NAR SON NAS KYANG MA RANG GIS SDIG SDUG GTAM NGAN LA MA 'DZEMS PAR BSAGS BSAGS NAS MA RANG GIS KYANG LONGS SPYAD MA BRA BA'I RGYU NOR GANG YOD BU'I LAG TU BZHAG,
And while I was growing up she gathered together whatever I needed,
avoiding no bad deed, and no suffering, and caring nothing for what other
people might say of her. All the money and things she had she handed over
to me, hesitating to use anything for herself.

RANG LA CHOS BYED PA'I SKAL BA YOD NA MA RANG GIS NOR RDZAS LA PHANGS PA MED PAR MTHUN RKYEN SBYAR TE CHOS SGOR GZHUGS PA MAN CHAD 'KHOS KA GANG YOD PAS DRIN GYIS BSKYANGS PA LA TSAD MED,
For those of us who are fortunate enough to be practicing the monastic life, it
was mother who put forth all the necessary expenses, giving without
reservation, to arrange our admission into the monastery. And from that time
on she supported us here, from whatever resources she had. Thus the
kindness she has shown us is truly without measure.

TSE 'DI'I MAS DRIN GYIS BSKYANGS PA YANG TSE 'DI GCIG PU MA YIN PAR, RANG GI TSE RABS SNGA MA MANG POR DRIN CHEN POS YANG NAS YANG DU GRANGS MED PAR BSKYANGS, TSE 'DI'I MA 'DI TZAM MA ZAD SEMS CAN THAMS CAD KYANG DA LTA SKYE 'CHI 'PHOS PA'I DBANG GIS NGO MA SHES PA MA GTOGS TSE RABS SNGA MA RNAMS SU RANG GI MA BYAS PA'I SKABS TSE 'DI'I MAS JI LTAR DRIN GYIS BSKYANGS PA LTAR DRIN CHEN PO'I SGO NAS BSKYANGS PA SHA STAG YIN TE,
And this is not the only life in which my present mother has given this
kindness to me. She has showered me with this kindness, great kindness, over
and over, countless times, in my many lives before. And she is not the only
one; every single living being has been my mother in my past lives, and during
those lives cared for me no less than my present mother does--it is only my
transitions from death to birth that prevent me from recognizing all these
mothers now.

DPER NA DA LTA'I DUD 'GRO KHYI LA SOGS PA DANG , BYA BYI'U TSOS RANG RANG GI BU LA SNYING BRTZE LUGS DANG , DRIN GYIS JI LTAR BSKYANG LUGS LA BLTAS KYANG SHES PAR NUS GSUNGS,
Look now, concluded our Lama, at the way any common animal--a dog or
bird, even the tiny sparrow--shows affection for its young, and cares for it
well. From watching this we can imagine what kindness we were given too.
 DRIN GZO BA NI, DE LTAR RANG LA THOG MA MED PA'I DUS NAS YANG YANG DRIN GYIS BSKYANGS PA'I MA SEMS CAN RNAMS GONG DU BSHAD PA'I CHU BO BZHI'I RGYUN GYIS 'KHOR BA'I RGYA MTSO CHEN PO'I KLONG DU KHYER NAS SDUG BSNGAL GSUM LA SOGS PAS RGYUN CHAD MED PAR MNAR TE SHIN TU NYAM THAG PA LA,
The next step in gaining the wish for enlightenment is to develop a wish to
repay this great kindness. So every living being is my mother, and has given
me her loving care over and over endlessly, for time with no beginning. And
we know from what was described above that they are being swept along by
four great currents, out to sea--to the vast expanse of the ocean of cyclic life.
They are tormented, without a break, by the three types of suffering, and all
the other pains. Their situation is desperate.

DA LTA, BU RANG LA DE DAG 'KHOR BA'I RGYA MTSO LAS THAR BA'I THABS BYA RGYU YOD BZHIN DU CI YANG MI SEMS PAR BSDAD NA SHIN TU MA RABS KHREL MED THA CHAD YIN PAS NA,
And here am I, their child. Right now I have a chance to rescue them from
this ocean of cyclic life. Suppose I simply sit and bide my time, and give no
thought to them. This is the lowest a person could stoop--base and absolutely
shameless.

DA NI SEMS CAN RANG RANG GI NGOS NAS ZAS GOS GNAS MAL RNYED PA SOGS GNAS SKABS KYI 'KHOR BA'I BDE BA DE TZAM MA YIN PAR MTHAR THUG GI BDE BA LA BKOD NA DRIN GZO'I MCHOG TU 'GYUR BAS, DES NA SEMS CAN THAMS CAD BDE BA THAMS CAD DANG LDAN PA DANG , SDUG BSNGAL THAMS CAD DANG BRAL BA ZHIG BYA DGOS PAR 'DUG SNYAM DU BSAM,
Right now I could give them things that they would be happy to get--food, or
clothes, or beds to sleep on, whatever. But these are only some temporary
happiness within the circle of life. The very highest way of repaying their
kindness would be to put them into the state of ultimate happiness. So let me
decide within myself that every living being must come to have every
happiness. And every one should be freed as well from every form of pain.
 DE YANG SEMS CAN 'DI DAG LA ZAG MED KYI BDE BA TA GA LA YOD DE, ZAG BCAS KYI BDE BA TZAM YANG MI 'DUG, SEMS CAN KHO RANG TSOS BDE BA YIN SNYAM PA 'DI RNAMS KYANG NGO BO 'GYUR BA'I SDUG BSNGAL SHA STAG YIN, 'DOD RGYU BDE BA 'DOD KYANG BDE BA'I RGYUR DGE BA SGRUB MI SHES, MI 'DOD RGYU SDUG BSNGAL MI 'DOD KYANG , SDUG BSNGAL GYI RGYU SDIG PA SPONG MI SHES, BLANG DOR GO LOG TU SPYAD DE SDUG BSNGAL GYIS NYAM THAG PA'I MA RGAN SEMS CAN   
Right now it's absurd to say that these beings have any kind of pure
happiness--they don't even have any of the impure kinds. Every single thing
they think is happiness is, in its essence, nothing more than pain. They want
wantables but don't want to know about doing the good deeds that bring
happiness. They want no unwantables but don't want to know about giving
up the bad deeds that bring pain. They act ass backwards: they do what they
shouldn't and don't what they should. And so my dear aged mothers, these
living beings, are made to suffer.

   'DI DAG THAMS CAD BDE BA DANG BDE BA'I RGYU THAMS CAD DANG LDAN NA CI MA RUNG , LDAN PAR GYUR CIG, LDAN PA ZHIG NGA RANG GIS BYED, SEMS CAN THAMS CAD SDUG BSNGAL DANG SDUG BSNGAL GYI RGYU THAMS CAD DANG BRAL NA CI MA RUNG , BRAL BAR GYUR 
CIG,BRAL BA ZHIG NGA RANG GIS BYED SNYAM DU YANG YANG BSGOMS PAS BYAMS PA DANG SNYING RJE SHUGS CAN BSKYED,
"How good it would be if they could all find every happiness,
and every cause of happiness. I wish they could. I'll see that
they do."
"How good it would be if they could all be free of every pain,
and every cause of pain. I wish they could. I'll see that they do."
Let these two trains of thought run through your mind; meditate on them over
and over again. Then you will come to feel the very strongest loving-kindness
and compassion.

YANG KHA CIG LA, SEMS CAN THAMS CAD KYI KHUR RANG GIS BYED MI DGOS TE, SEMS CAN 'DREN MKHAN SANGS RGYAS BYANG SEMS MANG PO YOD SNYAM PA LTA BU 'BYUNG SRID KYANG DE NI SHIN TU MA RABS KHREL MED THA CHAD YIN PAS DE 'DRA BSAM PA GTAN NAS MI RUNG STE, DPER NA TSE 'DI'I RANG GI MA'I BKRES SKOM SOGS KYI SDUG BSNGAL SEL BA'I THABS BU GZHAN GYIS BYAS NA YANG , RANG LA DRIN GYIS BSKYANGS PA'I DRIN LAN GZO BA'I KHUR DE RANG NYID LA BAB PA BZHIN DU,
Some people might come up with the idea that "Why should I take upon
myself this great load, of every living being? There are plenty of Buddhas and
bodhisattvas around to guide them on their way." This kind of thought though
is absolutely improper. It's base. It's shameless. It's as if your mother in this
life was hungry, and parched, and you expected someone else's child to go and
give her food and drink. But it's you for whom she has cared, and the
responsibility of paying her back has fallen only to you.

RANG LA SEMS CAN THAMS CAD KYIS THOG MA MED PA NAS MA LAN GRANGS MANG PO BYAS SHING , DE DAG GI SKABS THAMS CAD DU TSE 'DI'I MA LTAR DRIN CHEN PO'I SGO NAS BSKYANGS PA SHA STAG YIN PAS, DE'I DRIN LAN GZO BA NI SANGS RGYAS BYANG SEMS GZHAN SU LA'ANG KHAG MI 'KHRI BAR RANG GCIG PU'I KHUR DU BABS PAS NA,
It's the same with all these living beings, who for beginningless time have
served as my mother so many times, and who in each of these times cared for
me in every way with the kindness of this present mother. Returning their
kindness is no business of anyone else at all, not for some Buddha or
bodhisattva--it is my responsibility, and only mine.

SEMS CAN BDE BA DANG LDAN PA DANG SDUG BSNGAL DANG BRAL BAR BYED MKHAN DE'ANG GZHAN LA RAG MA LAS PAR SEMS CAN THAMS CAD BDE BA THAMS CAD DANG LDAN PA YANG NGA RANG GCIG BUS BYED, SDUG BSNGAL THAMS CAD DANG BRAL BA YANG NGA RANG GCIG PUS BYED, BLA MA SANGS RGYAS KYI GO 'PHANG LA'ANG NGA RANG GCIG PUS BKOD SNYAM PA'I LHAG PA'I BSAM PA SHUGS DRAG TU BSGOM,
So someone is going to do it--to make sure every sentient being has every
happiness, and never a single pain. It is going to be myself; I'll rely on no one
else. I by myself will see to it that every single being comes to have every
single happiness. And I by myself will see to it that every single being gets
free of every single pain. I will by myself put them into the state of the Lama,
the state of Buddhahood. Meditate strongly on these thoughts; they are the
step we call the "extraordinary form of personal responsibility."

DE LTA BU'I SEMS BSKYED NA'ANG DA LTA NI RANG LA SEMS CAN THAMS CAD LTA 
ZHOG,SEMS CAN GCIG TZAM 'DREN PA'I NUS PA YANG MI 'DUG, 'O NA DE LTA BU'I NUS PA DE SU LA YOD CE NA, DE NI YANG DAG PAR RDZOGS PA'I SANGS RGYAS NYAG GCIG LA YOD PA MA GTOGS GZHAN SU LA'ANG MED, RANG GIS KYANG SANGS RGYAS KYI GO 'PHANG DE THOB NA DON GNYIS MTHAR PHYIN TE SKU GSUNG THUGS KYI 'OD ZER RE RES KYANG SEMS CAN GRANGS MED PA'I DON BYA BAR NUS PAS,
I may be able to develop this noble intention, but the fact is that I'm
completely incapable of leading a single being to Buddhahood--much less
every one of them. Who then has the capacity? This power is had by a fully
enlightened Buddha--only by him, and by no one else at all. If I can reach the

same state, I will by definition have brought both mine and others' benefit to
its perfection. And then every single ray of light that emanates from me,
whether it be an action of my body, or my speech, or my thoughts, will have
the power to accomplish the ends of countless sentient beings.

DES NA SEMS CAN THAMS CAD KYI DON DU SANGS RGYAS KYI GO 'PHANG DE NYID DUS MYUR BA NYID DU THOB PA ZHIG CI NAS KYANG BYA SNYAM DU BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS BCOS MA MA YIN PA BSKYED,
And so, for the sake of every living being, I will do anything I can to achieve
this one great goal--the state of a Buddha--with every speed. Think this way
to yourself, and do anything you can to develop the genuine wish to reach
enlightenment for every living being.

BYANG SEMS SBYANG SKABS SANGS RGYAS THOB NA DE'I ZHOR DU RANG DON YANG 'BAD MED DU 'BYUNG BAR BSAM NA THEG DMAN DU MI LHUNG BA'I GNAD YOD PAR RJE'I LAM RIM DU GSUNGS YOD GSUNG ,
While you practice these meditations to develop the wish for enlightenment,
you can also reflect that--when you achieve Buddhahood--you will by the
way automatically gain everything you need for yourself as well. Our Lama
mentioned that this point was stated in Lord Tsongkapa's exposition on the
Steps of the path as being very helpful in preventing a person from slipping
to the lesser way.134

RGYU 'BRAS MAN NGAG BDUN GYI DANG PO GSUM NI SNYING RJE CHEN PO'I GZHI SGRUB PA YIN, YID 'ONG GI BYAMS PA NI DE GSUM GYI 'BRAS BUR 'ONG BAS DMIGS PA LOGS SU SKYONG TSUL MED KYANG , DE'I TSAB TU SEMS CAN THAMS CAD BDE BA DANG LDAN 'DOD KYI BYAMS PA BSGOM DGOS,
The first three of the seven parts in this cause-and-effect instruction provide a
foundation for great compassion. The "beautiful" form of loving-kindness
comes out as a result of these three, so there is no separate meditation

instruction for it.135
One must though in its place meditate upon the loving-
kindness where you wish that every being gain every happiness.

BYAMS PA DE DANG , SNYING RJE, LHAG BSAM GSUM NI GZHAN DON DON GNYER GYI BLO YIN, SEMS BSKYED DNGOS NI DE DAG GI 'BRAS BU YIN, LAM RIM YANG SKYES BU CHUNG 'BRING GI LAM NI SEMS SKYE BA'I SNGON 'GRO DANG , BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS SGOM TSUL NI DNGOS GZHI, MJUG SPYOD PA'I SKOR RNAMS DE'I BSLAB BYA YIN,
This loving-kindness, as well as compassion and the extraordinary type of
personal responsibility, are all forms of an attitude of striving for the welfare
of others. The actual wish for enlightenment is their result. The works on the
Steps of the path themselves have a similar structure. The paths for people of
lesser and medium scopes represent a preliminary to developing the wish for
enlightenment. The teaching on how to meditate on this great wish is the main
stage. In conclusion then come the sections on bodhisattva deeds--advices in
acting out the wish.

BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS SBYONG BA'I SKABS SU SEMS BSKYED NYER GNYIS DANG , SMON 'JUG SOGS KYI NGO BO KHYAD PAR RNAMS SHES PAR BYAS TE BLO SBYANG DGOS,
When you're practicing to develop this wish for enlightenment, you should
train your mind in its basic nature and all its various attributes: these include
the twenty-two forms of the wish, the distinction between praying and actually
engaging, and so on.136

BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS RIN PO CHE 'DI NI RGYAL BA'I GSUNG RAB THAMS CAD KYI SNYING PO DANG , RGYAL SRAS BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA' THAMS CAD KYI THUGS DAM GYI MTHIL GCIG PU YIN TE, SPYOD 'JUG LAS,
This precious jewel, the wish to gain enlightenment for every being, is the
inner essence of all the high teachings of the victorious Buddhas. It is the
single centermost contemplation of every one of their sons--the bodhisattvas.
As The Bodhisattva's Life relates,

,DAM CHOS 'O MA BSRUBS PA LAS,
,MAR GYI NYING KHU PHYUNG BA YIN,
It's the purest essence of the butter
Churned from the milk of the holy word.

,ZHES DANG ,
,BSKAL PA DU MAR RAB DGONGS MDZAD PA YI,
,THUB DBANG RNAMS KYIS 'DI NYID PHAN PAR GZIGS,
We see too,
Many eons the Able Lords considered,
And found but this to be of benefit.137

,ZHES DANG , 'JAM MGON TZONG KHA PA CHEN POS KYANG , SEMS BSKYED THEG MCHOG LAM GYI GZHUNG SHING STE, , ZHES PA NAS, DE LTAR SHES NAS RGYAL SRAS DPA' BO RNAMS, , RIN CHEN SEMS MCHOG THUGS DAM MTHIL DU MDZAD, , CES GSUNGS, RJE THAMS CAD MKHYEN PAS BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS RIN PO CHE 'DI KHO NA MA GTOGS GZHAN GANG LA'ANG THUGS DAM GYI MTHIL DU MA GSUNGS PAS, RANG CAG KYANG THEG PA CHEN PO BA ZHIG BYED 'DOD NA BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS LA NYAMS LEN GYI MTHIL DU BYA DGOS,
Our gentle protector, the great Tsongkapa, has as well composed the lines that
begin with "Center beam of the highest way, the wish..." and conclude with
"...Bodhisattva princes, knowing this, / Keep the high jewel wish their center
practice."138
It was only this precious wish for enlightenment, and nothing else
at all, that the all-knowing Lord ever described as the "center practice."
Therefore those of us who wish to become followers of the greater way must
make the wish for enlightenment our very centermost practice.

DENG SANG THUGS DAM GYI MTHIL GANG LA BYED CES DRIS NA YI DAM ZHIG LA BYED ZER BA LAS, BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS LA BYED ZER MKHAN PHAR ZHOG, BYANG SEMS 'DI LA THUGS DAM GYI MTHIL DU BYED DGOS PAR SHES MKHAN YANG DKON PAR 'DUG,
Nowadays when you go up to someone and ask him what his very most
important practice is, he'll tell you he's meditating on one of those powerful
tutelary deities. You don't meet people who say their chief practice is
meditating on the wish to achieve enlightenment for every living being. Much
less, for in fact it's quite difficult to find anyone who even realizes that he
should make this wish his centermost practice.

KHA SHAS KYIS THUGS DAM GYI MTHIL DE BSANGS DANG , GSER SKYEM DANG , KHA MCHU NAG PO ZHI BAR BYED PA'I GZUNGS, NYES PA KUN SEL, LUG GZUNGS, RTA GZUNGS, NOR GZUNGS, BAR CHAD LAM SEL, RGYA NAG SKAG BZLOG, MI KHA DGRA BSGYUR SOGS LA BYED, DE LA BLTOS NA YI DAM GYI LHA TSAD LDAN RE LA THUGS DAM GYI MTHIL DU BYED ZER BA DE YANG DGA' RAB YIN,
We see people making all different sorts of things their central practice: the
Elimination Ritual for getting rid of bad spirits, the Golden Tea offering, the
Spell for Ending Evil Litigation, the ritual they call Stopping All Harms, the
Sheep Spell, the Horse Spell, the Money Spell, the ritual for No More Problems,
the ritual for Stopping Bad Luck at the End of the Twelve-Year Cycle, the ritual
for Preventing the Praise that Others Give You from Turning to a Curse, and
on and on. These are all so bad that they make it look pretty good when a
person can say he's making a central practice out of anything at all associated
with some authentic tutelary deity.139

YANG LUNG PA KHA CIG TU, MNA' BSHAGS RIN CHEN PHRENG BA DANG , SDIG BSHAGS GSER GYI SPU GRI , KHYI MDO, SPYANG MDO, WA MDO, DRED MDO, SBRUL MDO ZER BA SOGS GANG DRAN DRAN BYAS PA LTA BU DE 'DRA DAR SROL 'DUG KYANG , DE TSO LA KHUNGS RNAM DAG YOD PA GTAN NAS MA MTHONG ZHING ,
We also see a number of works gaining some popularity in different localities
that seem to be just anything somebody could think up: the String of Jewels
for those Bound by Blood, the Blade of Gold for Confessing Sins, the so-called
"Dog Sutra," the so-called "Wolf Sutra," the so-called "Fox Sutra," the so-called
"Bear Sutra," the so-called "Snake Sutra," and all the rest. We find though
absolutely no legitimate origin for any of these works.

GAL TE SDIG BSHAGS SU BTON RGYU ZHIG NGES PAR DGOS NA'ANG DPE CHA BRDZUN MA, NGAL BA DON MED DE 'DRAS LAG MI THOGS PAR PHUNG PO GSUM PA'I MDO DANG , SMAN BLA'I MDO, THAR PA CHEN PO'I MDO, MDO SDE BSKAL BZANG LA SOGS PA RGYAL BAS MDO RGYUD RNAMS SU MANG DU GSUNGS PA'I TSAD LDAN KHUNGS DAG DE 'DRA LA KLOG 'DON BYED DGOS GSUNGS,
If you really do need a text to use for confessing your bad deeds, you should
stop wasting your time with fake scriptures and meaningless efforts like these.
The Victors have, in all their open and secret teachings, given us more than
enough appropriate works: the Three Heaps Sutra, the Sublime Medicine Sutra,
the Sutra of the Great Freedom, the Sutra of the Eon of Fortune, and others of the
like.140
It is texts like these, our Lama told us, authoritative texts with a
legitimate origin, that we must use for our study and recitations.

YANG 'GA' SHAS KYI SEMS LA, BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS LOS YOD, CHO GA'I 'GOR SANGS RGYAS CHOS TSOGS MA BTON NAS SEMS CAN THAMS CAD KYI DON DU SANGS RGYAS THOB PAR SHOG CIG SNYAM PA DE YIN BSAM YANG DE NI BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS LA YID SMON BYAS PA TZAM DANG , SMON LAM BTAB PA TZAM LAS DNGOS MA YIN TE, DE YIN NA DGE SBYOR BYED KHUL BYAS PA GZHAN DANG GZHAN LAS KYANG BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS LAS SLA SHOS SU SNANG BA'I PHYIR RO, , DE LTAR NA BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS NI GONG DU BSHAD PA LTAR BLO RIM GYIS SBYANGS TE SKYE DGOS PA YIN GSUNGS,
Now there are also some people around who think to themselves, "But I do
have the wish for enlightenment. After all, at the beginning of all my
devotions I recite the 'Buddha-Dharma-Sangha' prayer141
and think about
achieving Buddhahood so I could help every living being." This though is just
expressing a hope that you gain the wish for enlightenment--it's just making
a prayer about the wish. It's not the actual wish itself. If it were, then
developing the wish to achieve Buddhahood would have to be the very easiest
of all the many practices of virtue we are supposedly trying to do. And so,
concluded our Lama, we must rather gain this true wish by putting our minds
through the training described above--one by one through each of the steps,
in order.
XIII. How to Know When You've Found
the Wish for Enlightenment

GSUM PA SEMS DE SKYES PA'I TSAD NI, SGOM RIM DANG PO LAS GSUNGS PA LAM RIM CHE CHUNG SOGS LAS ZHIB TU GSAL ZHING , MDOR BSDU NA, SHIN TU GCES PA'I BU ME DONG DU LHUNG BA'I MA DES, BU YIS SDUG BSNGAL MYONG BA LA SKAD CIG KYANG MI BZOD PAR BU ME DONG NAS 'DON PA LA SHIN TU RINGS PA LTAR,
This brings us to the third and final section in our explanation of the wish for
enlightenment: how to know when you've finally developed it. This point is
covered with great detail in various works, including both the more extensive
and the briefer presentations on the Steps of the path to enlightenment, which
at this point employ material from the first of the Stages of Meditation.142
To put
it briefly, suppose a mother has watched her beloved child slip down into a pit
of red-hot coals. The fire is searing his body. She cannot stand to see it go on
for a single second. She throws herself forward to pull the child out.

MA RGAN SEMS CAN RNAMS 'KHOR BA DANG NGAN SONG GI SDUG BSNGAL BZOD GLAGS MED PAS MNAR BA LA SKAD CIG KYANG MI BZOD PAR, SEMS CAN THAMS CAD KYI DON DU RDZOGS PA'I SANGS RGYAS KYI GO 'PHANG MYUR BA NYID DU THOB 'DOD KYI BLO BCOS MA MA YIN PA ZHIG SKYES NA BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS SKYES PA'I TSAD YIN GSUNGS,
All the living creatures of the universe, all our dear mothers, are burning in the
same way, in the unbearable pain of the three lower realms, and the circle of
life in general. When we cannot stand to see it go on for a single second more,
when we finally feel the true wish to reach total enlightenment, immediately,
for the sake of every living being, well then--our Lama concluded--you can
say you have gained the wish for enlightenment.

Notes to Reading Eight
130. Even just wishing... Quotation on f. 3a of this textbook for bodhisattvas
(entry 71).
131. Were the merit of the wish... Quotation from f. 352b of this teaching of the
Buddha himself (entry 11).
132. Loving-Gaze: The divine form of the Buddha that represents all his
compassion. The practice mentioned can be learned from a qualified lama.
133. Commentary on Valid Perception: Famed treatise which forms the basis for
the study of formal logic in Buddhist monasteries. It was composed by Master
Dharmakirti (c. 630 A.D.) in explanation of the Compendium on Valid Perception
written by Master Dignaga (c. 450 A.D.), great forefather of the Buddhist logic
traditions. The reasoning mentioned is found in the second chapter, the "Proof
of Infallibility," beginning from line 142 (ff. 108b-109a, entry 22).
134. preventing a person from slipping: Some discussions of these benefits appear
in Lord Tsongkapa's work on ff. 182-6 and 189 (entry 61).
135. "beautiful" form of loving-kindness: Means to see every other living creature
as beautiful or beloved as one's only child; this loving-kindness is
distinguished from the one mentioned next.
136. twenty-two forms of the wish: These metaphors are found on f. 2b of the
Jewel of Realizations (see note 69). Here the wish for enlightenment is compared
to earth, gold, the first day's moon, fire, a mine, a cache of gemstones, the
ocean, a diamond, the king of mountains, medicine, a spiritual guide, a
wish-giving jewel, the sun, a song, a king, a treasure, a highway, a riding
horse, a fountain of water, a sweet sound, a river, and a cloud. Each metaphor
stands for the wish at a different level of realization; the venerable Lama of
Chone, Drakpa Shedrup (1675-1748) gives a concise explanation of them in his
commentary (pp. 45-6, entry 13).
The distinction between "praying" for and "engaging" in the wish for
enlightenment is described as the difference between wanting to go somewhere
and then actually stepping along with the resolve to reach the goal. In the
latter case one has taken the formal vows for the wish and is acting with the
conscious intention of attaining enlightenment for all living beings. See pp.
109-110 of entry 31, the commentary to the Jewel by Kedrup Tenpa Dargye

(1493-1568), a renowned scholar from Pabongka Rinpoche's own Sera Mey
College.
137. Many eons the Able Lords... This quotation found on f. 2a; the preceding
reference is on f. 7b (entry 71).
138. Center beam of the highest way... Again from the very brief version of his
Steps on the Path (p. 310, entry 63). The entire context reads as follows:
Center beam of the highest way, the wish;
Foundation, support for those of mighty deeds;
Alchemist elixir for turning both the collections;
Gold mine of merit, full of a mass of good.
Bodhisattva princes, knowing this,
Keep the high jewel wish their center practice.
The "two collections" are the accumulations of knowledge and virtue which
produce the bodies of a Buddha (see note 32).
139. the Elimination Ritual, etc.: We have not located the spurious texts listed.
140. Three Heaps Sutra, etc.: These four teachings of the Buddha himself are
listed at entries 39, 21, 33, and 10 respectively.
141. Buddha-Dharma-Sangha prayer: A traditional prayer for refuge and
developing the wish for enlightenment. It reads,
I go for refuge, until I reach enlightenment,
To the Buddha, Dharma, and the highest Sangha.
By the merit of giving and other goods deeds I do
May I become a Buddha to help all living beings.
The Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha are explained in note 110.
142. Stages of Meditation: The point is discussed by Lord Tsongkapa at ff. 89-92
of his shorter Steps on the Path (entry 60), and ff. 191-202 in his longer version
(entry 61). Here a number of times he quotes the Stages of Meditation, a treatise
in three parts by the eighth-century Buddhist master Kamalashila (entry 1).
Kamalashila is best known for his successful defense of the Indian Buddhist
teaching of analytical meditation before the Tibetan king Trisong Detsen. His
opponents were Chinese monks who wrongly asserted that meditating on
nothing at all would be of any benefit.

181
The Asian Classics Institute
Course I: The Principal Teachings of Buddhism
Reading Nine
THE THIRD PATH: CORRECT VIEW
XIV. Why You Need Correct View

GSUM PA YANG DAG PA'I LTA BA BSHAD PA LA LNGA LAS, DANG PO LTA BA BSGOM DGOS PA'I RGYU MTSAN NI,
We have now reached the third of the four parts of the body of the text: the
explanation of correct view. Here there are five sections; the first, which
explains why you need to meditate on correct view, is expressed in the next
verse of the root text:

,GNAS LUGS RTOGS PA'I SHES RAB MI LDAN NA,
,NGES 'BYUNG BYANG CHUB SEMS LA GOMS BYAS KYANG ,
,SRID PA'I RTZA BA GCOD PAR MI NUS PAS,
,DE PHYIR RTEN 'BREL RTOGS PA'I THABS LA 'BAD,
,CES PA 'DIS BSTAN,
(9)
You may master renunciation and the wish,
But unless you have the wisdom perceiving reality
You cannot cut the root of cyclic life.
Make efforts in ways then to perceive interdependence.

DE YANG ZAB MO DE KHO NA NYID KYI LTA BA'AM GNAS LUGS DON DAM BDEN PA RTOGS PA'I SHES RAB DANG MI LDAN NA, NGES 'BYUNG BYANG SEMS SOGS THABS KYI CHA LA JI TZAM 'BAD KYANG BDAG 'DZIN GYI DNGOS GNYEN DU MI 'GRO BAS SRID PA'I RTZA BA BDAG 'DZIN GCOD PAR MI NUS,
What the verse is saying is this: "Unless you have that very profound correct
view about suchness--unless you have the wisdom that perceives reality, or
ultimate truth--you can strive to perfect renunciation and the wish for
enlightenment (along with all the other 'method' practices) as much as you
please; but you cannot cut the root of cyclic life, grasping to a 'self,' since these
practices alone do not act as a direct antidote for your grasping."

DER MA ZAD ZAB MO'I LTA BA MED NA NGES 'BYUNG DANG BYANG SEMS GNYIS RKYANG PAS NI THEG CHEN TSOGS LAM MAN CHAD LAS, DE YAN CHAD RNAMS 'THOB PAR MI NUS PA DANG , THEG DMAN YIN NA THEG DMAN GYI SBYOR LAM YANG MI 'THOB,
And that's not all. A person without this profound view may be able to attain
various levels on up to the first of the five paths of the greater way, the
"accumulation" path, by force of renunciation and the wish for enlightenment
alone. But he can never go any further. And if he is a follower of the lesser
way he cannot even reach the second of its paths, the path of "preparation."143
 DE GNYIS KYIS ZIN PA'I STENG DU ZAB MO'I LTA BA ZHIG RTOGS NA THEG CHEN SBYOR LAM YAN GYIS LAM RNAMS KYANG 'THOB NUS PA DANG , THAR PA DANG THAMS CAD MKHYEN PA'I RGYUR 'GRO BA LA KHYAD ZHUGS PA YIN,
Suppose though that your mind is completely filled with thoughts of
renunciation and the wish to achieve enlightenment for every living being, and
then in addition you open your eyes to this profound view. Now you can
achieve all the various levels and paths of the greater way, from its second
path (also called "preparation") on up. Then too the things you do take on a
very special power, to bring about for you the states of freedom and all-
knowing.

RANG CAG GIS 'GRO BA SGROL BAR KHAS BLANGS PA LA SGROL BA'I THABS SHIG MED NA BSAM PA BZANG BA TZAM ZHIG LAS MI YONG BAS THOG MAR 'KHOR BA'I RTZA BA GCOD BYED ZAB MO'I LTA BA PHU THAG CHOD PA ZHIG AE RNYED BLTA DGOS, LAS 'BRAS NGES PA'I 'JIG RTEN PA'I YANG DAG PA'I LTA BA TZAM GYIS MI PHAN, DE YANG MTHAR GTUGS NA BDAG MED PAR RTOGS PA'I LTA BA 'DI LA THUG,
All of us sitting here have decided that we will take it upon ourselves to
liberate living beings. But unless we find some actual way of liberating them,
this will never be more than some noble intent. Thus at the very start we have
to gain an outlook that says, "I am going to go and find the final form of that
profound view that cuts the root of cyclic life." Now there is a kind of correct
view that we call the "worldly" type; with it, you perceive the laws of actions
and their consequences. This view alone though is not enough. It too, by the
way, is ultimately tied to the view with which you realize that no self exists.
 BDAG MED RTOGS PA'I LTA BA 'DI MED PAR PHYI ROL PA KHA CIG TING NGE 'DZIN BSGOMS TE BSAM GZUGS BRGYAD KA THOB NA'ANG NYON MONGS SPONG BA LTA CI, NYON MONGS PA KHA PHRI BA TZAM YANG MA BYUNG STE, MDO TING NGE 'DZIN GYI RGYAL PO LAS,
Certain non-Buddhist sages can put themselves into a deep, single-pointed
state of meditation--and they attain all eight levels of concentration and
formlessness.144
But they lack the view with which you realize no self exists,
and fail therefore even to reduce their harmful emotions slightly--much less
to eliminate them. As the sutra called King of Concentration says,

,'JIG RTEN DAG NI TING 'DZIN SGOM BYED KYANG ,
,DES NI BDAG TU 'DU SHES 'JIG MI BYED,
,DES NI NYON MONGS PHYIR ZHING RAB 'KHRUG STE,
,LHAG SPYOD KYIS NI TING 'DZIN 'DIR BSGOMS BZHIN,
,ZHES GSUNGS PA RED,
The worldly meditate on concentration
But it doesn't destroy their concept of a self.
This feeds their unhealthy thoughts, stirs them up,
And ends like the meditation of Udraka.145

DE'I PHYIR 'KHOR BA'I RTZA BA BDAG 'DZIN GCOD PA LA NGES PAR BDAG MED PA'I LTA BA DGOS TE, DE NYID LAS,
Our tendency to grasp to some "self" is the very root of our circling life. To cut
this root we absolutely must gain the view that perceives that no such self
exists. As the same work says,

,GAL TE CHOS LA BDAG MED SO SOR 
RTOG,SO SOR DE BRTAGS GAL TE SGOM PA NI,
,DE NI MYA NGAN 'DAS THOB 'BRAS BU'I RGYU,
,RGYU GZHAN GANG YIN DES NI ZHIR MI 'GYUR,
Suppose you analyze, see the no-self of things,
And suppose you meditate on what you've seen;
It leads you to the result of gaining nirvana--
Nothing else can lead you to this peace.

CES GSUNGS PA LTAR THAR PA THOB PA LA BDAG TU 'DZIN PA RTZA BA NAS SPANG DGOS, DE SPONG BA LA BDAG 'DZIN DANG 'DZIN STANGS DNGOS 'GAL DU GYUR PA'I LAM BDAG MED BSGOM DGOS, BDAG MED BSGOM PA 'DI MED NA SBYIN PA GTONG BA DANG TSUL KHRIMS BSRUNG BA SOGS JI 'DRA ZHIG LA 'BAD KYANG THAR PA 'THOB PAR MI NUS TE, BZHI BRGYA PA LAS, ZHI SGO GNYIS PA YOD MA YIN, , ZHES GSUNGS, DES NA 'KHOR BA LAS THAR BA LA BDAG MED RTOGS PA'I SHES RAB 'DI MED THABS MED PA YIN,
To win freedom you must eliminate, from its root, this grasping to a "self." To
eliminate it, you must meditate on how nothing has a self: you must find a
path or mental viewpoint which holds things in a way that is completely
incompatible with the way you now grasp for a "self." You can make any
great efforts you want in practices like charity and morality, but without this
meditation on no-self you will never be able to attain freedom. As the 400
Verses says, "There is no second door to peace."146
This wisdom which
perceives that no self exists is then a "without which nothing" for freeing
yourself from the circle of life.

DE GCIG PUS KYANG MI CHOG BAR THABS SNYING RJE YANG MED THABS MED PAS THABS SHES YA MA BRAL BA ZHIG NGES PAR DGOS, DRI MA MED PAR GRAGS PAS BSTAN PA'I MDO LAS,
Wisdom though is not enough by itself either. Compassion too is a "without
which nothing." And this is why we say you must have both "method" and
"wisdom," never one without the other. As we read in the Sutra of Vimalakirti,

,THABS KYIS MA ZIN PA'I SHES RAB NI 'CHING BA'O,
,THABS KYIS ZIN PA'I SHES RAB NI THAR PA'O,
,SHES RAB KYIS MA ZIN PA'I THABS NI 'CHING BA'O,
,SHES RAB KYIS ZIN PA'I THABS NI THAR PA'O, ,
Wisdom not steeped in method is bondage.
Wisdom steeped in method is freedom.
Method not steeped in wisdom is bondage.
Method steeped in wisdom is freedom.147

ZHES GSUNGS PA LTAR, 'BRAS BU CHOS GZUGS KYI SKU GNYIS THOB PA LA'ANG THABS SHES YA MA BRAL BA'I SGO NAS TSOGS GNYIS ZUNG 'BREL DU BSAGS PA NGES PAR DGOS TE, DPAL MGON 'PHAGS PA KLU SGRUB KYIS,
The result we want to achieve is the two bodies of an enlightened being: the
"dharma body" and the "form body." To get them, we must gather together a
perfect union of two great masses of goodness. To do this we must rely on
method and wisdom, one always with the other. As our glorious savior, the
realized being Nagarjuna, has written:

,DGE BA 'DI YIS SKYE BO KUN,
,BSOD NAMS YE SHES TSOGS RDZOGS SHING ,
,BSOD NAMS YE SHES LAS BYUNG BA'I,
,DAM PA GNYIS NI THOB PAR SHOG CES DANG ,
By this virtue may all beings
Gather the masses of merit and wisdom.
May they achieve the ultimate two
That the merit and the wisdom produce.148

DPAL LDAN ZLA BAS KYANG ,
,KUN RDZOB DE NYID GSHOG YANGS DKAR PO RGYAS GYUR PA,
,NGANG PA'I RGYAL PO DE NI SKYE BO'I NGANG PA YIS,
,MDUN DU BDAR NAS DGE BA'I RLUNG GI SHUGS STOBS KYIS,
,RGYAL BA'I YON TAN RGYA MTSO'I PHA ROL MCHOG TU 'GRO,
The illustrious Chandrakirti has said as well,
On vast wide-spreading wings of both
the conventional and the real
The king goose flies on at the
center point in the formation
Of the other geese, all beings, spurred
by the wind of virtue,
Reaching to the farthest shore of the ocean
of Victors' qualities.149

ZHES KUN RDZOB NI THABS BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS DANG , DE NYID CES PA SHES RAB YANG DAG PA'I LTA BA STE, DPER NA BYA GSHOG PA GNYIS LDAN NAM MKHA' LA THOGS MED DU 'GRO BA LTAR, RGYAL BA'I YON TAN YONGS SU RDZOGS PA'I PHA ROL TU BGROD PA LA BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS DANG YANG DAG PA'I LTA BA'I THABS SHES GNYIS YA MA BRAL BA DGOS PA LAS, THABS SHES YA BRAL BYA GSHOG CHAG LTA BUS BGROD PAR MI NUS GSUNGS,
Here the word "conventional" refers to "method"; that is, the wish to achieve
enlightenment for every sentient being. "Reality" refers to "wisdom"--meaning
correct view. A great bird with both wings complete can soar unimpeded in
the sky; just so, a person who wants to travel to that farthest shore where he
possesses each and every good quality of the victorious Buddhas must have
method and wisdom--the wish for enlightenment and correct view--and he
must have them both together. A person who has one without the other is like
a bird with a broken wing. He cannot make the journey.

'O NA LTA BA DE JI 'DRA BYAS NAS BSGOM SNYAM NA, DE YANG GANG BYUNG GIS MI CHOG PAR BCOM LDAN 'DAS KYI BKA' TSAD MA NGES DON STON PA'I MDO SDE ZHIG GI RJES SU 'BRANG DGOS, SPYIR DRANG NGES KYI DON LA NGES DON NI MTHAR THUG GI DON DE GA RANG DU GNAS PA DANG , DRANG DON NI DON DE MTHAR THUG GI DON LA MI GNAS PA LA BYED, DRANG NGES KYI MDO YANG DON DAM BDEN PA BSTAN BYA'I GTZO BOR BYAS NAS BSTAN PA NGES DON GYI MDO DANG , DE LAS GZHAN PA'I MDO RNAMS DRANG DON GYI MDO YIN,
"How then do I gain this view?" you may ask. Not just anything will do: you
must rather follow one of the scriptures taught by the enlightened
Conquerors--a true teaching, and one which treats the "literal." Generally
speaking, we draw the distinction between "literal" and "figurative" as follows:
something is "literal" when its nature actually lies in the ultimate, and
something is "figurative" when its nature does not lie in the ultimate. "Literal"
scriptures then are those that deal chiefly with ultimate truth, while other types
of scriptures we call "figurative."

DRANG NGES KYI MDO'I DGONGS PA'ANG PAndI TA SU RUNG RUNG GIS 'GREL BAR MI NUS PAS, NGES DON GYI DGONGS PA 'GREL BAR RGYAL BA RANG NYID KYIS LUNG BSTAN PA LTAR MGON PO KLU SGRUB KYIS BLO GROS MI ZAD PA'I MDO LA BRTEN TE RTZA BA SHES RAB SOGS DBU MA RIGS TSOGS KYI SGO NAS NGES DON ZAB MO'I LTA BA RGYAL BA'I DGONGS PA LTAR SROL PHYE BAR MDZAD,
Not every ancient sage was capable of clarifying the true meaning of the literal
and figurative scriptures. For commenting on the true intent of the "literal" it
took the savior Nagarjuna, as foretold by the Buddhas themselves. He was
able to introduce an entire system clarifying the "literal" and profound view
just as the victorious Buddhas intended it. He did so through the Root Wisdom
and other works in his famed "Collection on the Reasoning of the Middle
Way," basing them all on the scripture known as Understanding that Has No
End.150

DE'I RJES SU SLOB DPON SANGS RGYAS BSKYANGS KYIS BU{ddh} P'A LI TA DANG , 'PHAGS PA LHAS DBU MA BZHI BRGYA PA SOGS MDZAD, LHAG PAR SLOB DPON ZLA BA GRAGS PAS 'PHAGS PA KLU SGRUB KYI DGONGS PA BZHIN DU RTZA SHE'I TSIG LA 'JUG PA TSIG GSAL DANG , DON LA 'JUG PA DBU MA LA 'JUG PA SOGS MDZAD,
Later on came the masters Buddhapalita, author of the commentary that bears
his name, and Aryadeva--who composed the 400 Verses on the Middle Way and
other titles. Most especially there was Master Chandrakirti who, following the
intent of the realized being Nagarjuna, wrote various works including A
Clarification of the Words (which explains the wording of Master Nagarjuna's
Root Wisdom) and Entering the Middle Way (which enters into the meaning of
the Root).151

DE DAG GI DGONGS PA PHYIN CI MA LOG PAR 'KHRUL PA'I DRI MA CUNG ZAD KYANG MED PAR BOD GANGS CAN GYI LJONGS 'DIR GSAL BAR MDZAD PA NI 'JAM MGON TZONG KHA PA CHEN PO KHO 
NA MA GTOGS GZHAN SU YANG MA BYUNG BAS, RANG CAG RNAMS 'PHAGS MCHOG KLU SGRUB YAB SRAS KYI LUGS BZANG , RJE THAMS CAD MKHYEN PA'I LEGS BSHAD RMAD DU BYUNG BA'I GZHUNG CHEN MO RNAMS LA BRTEN DGOS TE, 'JUG PA LAS,
Here in the Land of Snows, in Tibet, it was the gentle protector
Tsongkapa--and no one else but him--who was able to elucidate the true
meaning of these works with absolute accuracy, without the slightest taint of
error. Thus you and I should follow the excellent system of that highest of
realized beings, Nagarjuna, and his spiritual sons; we should rely on the great
textbooks of the omniscient Lord Tsongkapa, on his high and wondrous words.
As Entering the Middle Way states,

,SLOB DPON KLU SGRUB LUGS KYI LAM LAS NI,
,PHYI ROL GYUR LA ZHI BA'I THABS MED DO,
,DE DAG KUN RDZOB DE NYID BDEN LAS NYAMS,
,DE LAS NYAMS PAS THAR PA GRUB YOD MIN,
,ZHES DANG ,
There's no way to peace for people who've
stepped from the path
Of the system taught by the Master Nagarjuna.
They've lost the truths, the conventional
and the real;
Those who've lost the truths cannot be free.152

,MNYAM MED JO BO CHEN POS KYANG ,
,KLU SGRUB SLOB MA ZLA GRAGS YIN,
,DE LAS BRGYUD PA'I MAN NGAG GIS,
,CHOS NYID BDEN PA RTOGS PAR 'GYUR,
,ZHES GSUNGS, DES NA ZAB MO'I LTA BA 'DI MDO SNGAGS GNYIS KA LA MED THABS MED PA YIN,
The matchless Lord Atisha has said as well:
Nagarjuna's student was Chandrakirti;
The instructions handed down from them
Bring you to see reality, truth.153
You can see then that this profound viewpoint on things is indispensable for
both the open and the secret teachings.

SPYIR RGYA GAR 'PHAGS PA'I YUL DU GRUB MTHA' SMRA BA BZHI BYUNG BA LAS, RANG SDE BYE SMRA GNAS MA BU PAS RTAG GCIG RANG DBANG CAN GYI BDAG DE DGAG BYAR 'DOD, BYE BRAG SMRA BA GZHAN DANG MDO SDE PAS RANG SKYA THUB PA'I RDZAS YOD KYIS GRUB PA DE DGAG BYAR 'DOD,
Broadly speaking, there were four great schools of Buddhist thought that came
out of India--the "land of the realized." Members of the Vatsiputriya section
of the "Detailist" school154
assert that what we seek to see does not exist is any
self which is unchanging, and singular, and independent. Other members of
the Detailist school, as well as those of the "Scripturalist" school,155
teach that
what we seek to deny is something that can stand on its own, something which
exists in a substantial way.

SEMS TZAM PAS GZUNG 'DZIN RDZAS GZHAN GYIS GRUB PA DE DGAG BYAR 'DOD, RANG RGYUD PAS BLO GNOD MED LA SNANG BA'I DBANG GIS BZHAG TZAM MA YIN PAR YUL RANG GI THUN MONG MA YIN PA'I GDOD LUGS SU GRUB PA DE DGAG BYAR 'DOD,
The "Mind-Only" school156
says that what we come to realize does not exist is
any case where the subject that holds an object and the object which it holds
are made from any different "substance."157
What we call the "Independent,"
one part of the Middle Way school,158
believes that what we come to refute is
any object that exists in some unique way of its own, rather than being
established as an existent thing simply by virtue of its having appeared to an
unaffected awareness.159

THAL 'GYUR BAS NI, RTOG PAS PHAR BTAGS TZAM MIN PAR YUL KHO RANG GI STENG NAS TSUR GRUB PA DE DGAG BYAR 'DOD PA YIN,
The "Implication" section of the Middle Way school,160
finally, teaches that what
we come to see has no existence is an object which exists from its own side,
rather than simply existing through a concept supplied from our side.

LAM GTZO 'DIR 'JAM MGON TZONG KHA PA CHEN POS, DE PHYIR RTEN 'BREL RTOGS PA'I THABS LA 'BAD, , CES RTEN 'BREL RTOGS PA'I THABS LA 'BAD GSUNGS PA LAS, STONG NYID RTOGS PA'I THABS LA 'BAD MA GSUNGS PA 'DI DGOS PA SHIN TU CHE STE,
Here in the verses of the Three Principal Paths our gentle protector, the great
Tsongkapa, has urged us to try to perceive interdependence; as the line goes,
"Make efforts in ways then to perceive interdependence." This he does instead
of telling us to "Make efforts in ways to perceive emptiness," and for an
extremely important reason.

RTEN 'BREL 'JOG TSUL LA DNGOS SMRA BAS NI, RGYU RKYEN LA BRTEN NAS 'BYUNG BA'I RGYU MTSAN GYIS RTEN 'BREL 'JOG PA LAS, RTAG PA LA RTEN 'BREL MI 'JOG,
Different schools have different ways of explaining "interdependence." The
"Functionalist" group161
says that when something is "interdependent," it's
because it has come about through various causes and conditions. This doesn't
allow them to establish interdependence for those objects which are
unchanging, and have no causes.

RANG RGYUD PAS DE LAS 'JOG TSUL CUNG DRAG PA RANG GI CHA SHAS LA BRTEN NAS GRUB PA RTEN 'BREL GYI DON DU 'JOG PAS RTAG MI RTAG GNYI GA'I STENG DU RTEN 'BREL 'JOG,
The "Independent" group has a way of describing interdependence that's a little
bit better. They say that something is interdependent whenever it exists in
dependence upon its parts. They then can establish interdependence with both
changing and unchanging objects: for those with causes and without.

DBU MA THAL 'GYUR BAS NI, 'JOG BYED DE DAG LAS PHRA BA GDAGS GZHI DANG 'DOGS BYED RTOG PA TSAD MA GNYIS LA BRTEN NAS BTAGS CHOS DE 'BYUNG BA LA RTEN 'BREL GYI DON DU 'JOG PAS,
The way the last group, the one we call "Implication," decides that something
is interdependent is subtler than all the rest. They say that something is
interdependent when we have taken two things--a reasonable basis to be given
a name and a reasonable idea to give it a name--and come out with an object
we gave a name.

RTEN 'BREL PHRA MO NI STONG NYID RTOGS PA'I THABS MA YIN KYANG , GRUB MTHA' THUN MONG DU KHAS LEN PA'I RGYU 'BRAS KYI RTEN 'BREL 'DI THOG MAR BSTAN NA CHAD LTA LAS BSRUNG BA DANG , STONG NYID RTOGS PA'I THABS SU 'GYUR BAS NA, STONG NYID RTOGS PA'I THABS SU THOG MAR RTEN 'BREL NAS KHRID PA 'DI GNAD SHIN TU CHE BA YIN GSUNGS,
This subtle form of interdependence is not itself the way to perceive emptiness,
but there is a good reason why we present interdependence--in the cause-and-
effect interpretation accepted by all the schools--here at the very outset. First
of all it prevents students from swinging to the opposite extreme where they
believe that, if all things are empty, they can have no existence at all.
Secondly, a correct understanding of interdependence does lead one to the way
of perceiving emptiness. And so, concluded our Lama, there is crucial
significance to presenting the instructions on interdependence first--as the first
step on the way to perceiving emptiness.
XV. What is Correct View?

GNYIS PA LTA BA GTAN LA 'BEB TSUL NI,
The second of the five points in our discussion of the third principal path
addresses the question: what is correct view? The answer appears in the next
verse of the root text.

,GANG ZHIG 'KHOR 'DAS CHOS RNAMS THAMS CAD KYI,
,RGYU 'BRAS NAM YANG BSLU BA MED MTHONG ZHING ,
,DMIGS PA'I GTAD SO GANG YIN KUN ZHIG PA,
,DE NI SANGS RGYAS DGYES PA'I LAM LA ZHUGS,
,ZHES PAS BSTAN,
(10)
A person's entered the path that pleases the Buddhas
When for all objects, in the cycle or beyond,
He sees that cause and effect can never fail,
And when for him they lose all solid appearance.

DE YANG GANG ZHIG SOGS KYIS STONG GZHI CHOS CAN DANG , RGYU 'BRAS SOGS KYIS RTEN 'BREL GYI GTAN TSIGS DANG , DMIGS PA'I SOGS KYIS BSGRUB BYA BSTAN,
The line here about "when for all objects" gives us the subject under
consideration: what we will see is empty. The line with the words "cause and
effect" is meant to give us the classic logical reason for proving things are
empty: "because they are interdependent." The line with "they lose all solid
appearance" presents us the premise that the reason is meant to prove.

CHOS THAMS CAD CES GZUGS NAS RNAM MKHYEN GYI BAR GYI CHOS THAMS CAD RANG GI CHA SHAS LA BRTEN NAS GRUB PAS NA THA SNYAD DU RGYU 'BRAS BSLU BA MED PA DANG , DGAG BYA RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA'I DMIGS GTAD ZHIG NAS BDEN PAR GRUB PA'AM, RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA'I DNGOS PO CUNG ZAD TZAM YANG MED PAR RTOGS PA DE RGYAL BA DGYES PA'I LAM YIN,
The expression "all objects" refers to each and every object from basic physical
matter on up to the omniscience of a Buddha. They all exist in dependence
upon their parts, so in a manner of speaking their "cause and effect can never
fail." The antithesis, which we seek to disprove, is that these objects could have
the solid existence they appear to have: that they could exist naturally. "When
they lose all solid appearance"--that is, when we perceive that there is not a
single thing in the universe which has any true or natural existence--then we
have found "the path that pleases the Buddhas."

RANG CAG 'KHOR BAR 'KHOR BYED KYI RTZA BA BDAG 'DZIN MA RIG PA 'DI LA THUG, DE GCOD PA LA BDAG MED RTOGS PA'I SHES RAB BSKYED DGOS, BDAG MED GTAN LA 'BEB LUGS RGYAS PAR NI LAM RIM LAS GSUNGS PA LTAR GNAD BZHI'I DPYAD PA SOGS DANG SBYAR NA LEGS KYANG , 'DIR RTEN 'BREL GYI GTAN TSIGS LA BRTEN NAS LTA BA'I GNAD 'GAG MDOR BSDUS TZAM ZHUS NA,
If we look for the very root that keeps you and I going round in this circle of
life, we come down to ignorance, to our grasping for a "self." To cut this root,
we must develop wisdom which perceives that no such "self" exists. If we
were to discuss what no-self is in any detailed way, it would be best to apply
a number of sections from the works on the Steps to the path; one example
would be the "fourfold analysis."162
Here though we will give only a brief
presentation of the most vital points concerning correct view, and we will use
the classical reasoning based on interdependence.

DE YANG CHOS THAMS CAD DGAGS GZHI DANG 'DOGS BYED LA BRTEN NAS BYUNG BA LAS, DE LA MA LTOS PAR RANG NGOS NAS GRUB PA RDUL TZAM YANG MED PAS, NGA YANG LUS SEMS GNYIS TSOGS KYI STENG DU PHAR BTAGS PA TZAM LA BRTEN NAS BYUNG BA LAS, LUS SEMS GNYIS TSOGS PA'I STENG DU PHAR BTAGS PA LA MA LTOS PAR NGA KHO RANG GI NGOS NAS TSUR GRUB PA MED, LUS SEMS GNYIS RE RE NAS KYANG RANG RANG GI NGOS NAS TSUR GRUB PA MED,
Now every existent object is a product of something to be given a name and
something else to give it a name. There is not a single atom of anything in the
universe which does not rely on this process--there is nothing which exists
from its own side. I too then am a product: someone has taken two things
together, my body and my mind, and called it "me." I am nothing more than
that. There is no "me" which exists from its own side; there is no "me" which
does not rely on someone taking my body and mind together and granting it
the name. Neither in fact do my body or my mind themselves exist from their
own sides.

'DI LA RTAGS BKOD NA, 'KHOR 'DAS KYI CHOS RNAMS CHOS CAN, BDEN 'DZIN GYI DMIGS PA'I GTAD SO RANG GI NGO BOS GRUB PA CUNG ZAD TZAM YANG MED DE, RTEN 'BREL YIN PA'I PHYIR,
We can express all this in the classical form of a logical statement:
Consider all objects, those of the cycle
and those beyond it.
They have none of the true and solid existence
that I hold them to have; they cannot
exist on their own,
Because they are interdependent.

DE YANG RTEN 'BREL ZHES GZHAN LA BRTEN NAS 'BREL BA'AM GZHAN LA BRTEN NAS 'BYUNG NA RANG NGOS NAS GRUB THABS MED PA   
What we mean here by "interdependence" is that all objects are interrelated
with others on which they depend; that is, they occur through dependence on
other objects. This is why there is absolutely no way they can exist on their
own.

   DPER NA, DGON PA'I DBU MDZAD DANG YUL GYI DPON PO SOGS BSKO BA NA, DBU MDZAD DU 'OS PA'I DBU MDZAD KYI GDAGS GZHI TSAD MA'I MI ZHIG LA, MKHAN PO LTA BUS 'DI DBU MDZAD YIN NO ZHES MING BRDAS PHAR MA BTAGS BAR DU DBU MDZAD KYI GDAGS GZHI TSOGS KYANG DBU MDZAD DU GRUB MI THUB,
We can take for example the way we appoint the chanting master of a
monastery, or the governor of some district, or any similar figure. First there
must be a reasonable basis to be called "chanting master": there must be a
person who is worthy of being the chanting master. Then there must be
someone like the abbot of the monastery who says, "He is now the chanting
master." Until the abbot does so, until the abbot applies the name and the
concept to this person, he cannot be the chanting master--even though he may
have all the qualities you need to be named "chanting master."

MING BRDAS PHAR MA BTAGS PAR DANG PO NAS DBU MDZAD RANG STENG NAS GRUB GRUB PA ZHIG YOD NA AA MA'I KHOG PA LA YOD DUS NAS GANG ZAG DE DBU MDZAD YIN DGOS PA DANG , AA MA'I MNGAL NAS SKYE DUS KYANG DBU MDZAD SKYES SONG ZER DGOS PA LA,
If this were not the case, and if the person were somehow the chanting master
from the beginning, all on his own without anyone putting the name or idea
on him, then he would have to have been the chanting master all along--from
the time he lay in his mother's womb. And when he was born, the moment
he came out of her womb, people then should have said, "Here comes the
chanting master!"

DE LTAR MI ZER BAR RKYEN GZHAN LA BRTEN NAS DBU MDZAD DU GRUB DGOS TE, GDAGS GZHI DBU MDZAD 'OS PA'I GRVA PA ZHIG LA 'DOGS MKHAN TSAD MA ZHIG GIS 'DI DBU MDZAD YIN ZHES PHAR MA BTAGS BAR DBU MDZAD MI ZER ZHING , KHO RANG GIS KYANG DBU MDZAD YIN SNYAM PA MED KYANG , KHYOD DBU MDZAD YIN NO ZHES RTOG PAS PHAR BTAGS TZAM NAS BZUNG DBU MDZAD DANG DBU MDZAD ZER ZHING , KHO RANG GIS KYANG NGA DBU MDZAD YIN SNYAM PA DE BYUNG BA RED,
But people didn't say it, because getting to be the chanting master depends on
many other factors. We don't call someone "chanting master" until there is a
basis to give the name--a monk who is fit to be chanting master, and until a
person qualified to give him the name hangs it on him, and says "This is the
chanting master." Neither until this time does the person himself think "I am
the chanting master." But once the concept has been applied to him, "You are
the chanting master," then people start to talk about him as "chanting master,"
and he too begins to think "I am the chanting master."

RTA LTA BU YANG RTA KHO RANG GI PHUNG PO DANG SHES PA GNYIS 'DZOMS TE RGYU RKYEN TSOGS PA'I STENG DU RTA ZHES PHAR BTAGS PA TZAM YIN, KHANG PA YANG GDAGS GZHI TSOGS PA LA BRTEN NAS BTAGS PA TZAM RED,
The case is the same with something like a horse. We take the body and the
mind of the horse, and we put them together--we take all the proper causes
and conditions together--and label them with the name "horse." A building
is the same too: nothing but a name put on a certain collection of parts that act
as the basis to receive the name.

DE BZHIN DU CHOS THAMS CAD RANG RANG GI GDAGS GZHI TSOGS PA LA BRTEN NAS CHOS DE DANG DE ZHES PHAR MING BRDAS BZHAG PA TZAM LAS, GDAGS GZHI LA MA BLTOS PAR YUL KHO RANG GI NGOS NAS TSUR GRUB PA RDUL PHRAN TZAM YANG MED,
And the same goes for every existing entity: they are nothing but a name and
a concept, "This we call this, and that we call that," applied to the collection of
parts that acts as the basis of the particular entity's name. There does not exist
the single tiniest bit of anything that is some kind of object on its own,
divorced of the parts we give its name.

'O NA CHOS THAMS CAD PHAR BTAGS TZAM YIN NA GSER LA RAG DANG , KA BA LA BUM PA LTA BU BTAGS NA DER GRUB CHOG GAM SNYAM NA, DE MI CHOG STE PHAR BTAGS TZAM YIN KYANG DE BTAGS PA LA GDAGS GZHI TSAD MA ZHIG DGOS,
"Well then," you might think to yourself, "if every object is nothing more that
what we label it, then I can go out and call gold 'brass,' or call a pillar a
'pitcher,' and that's just what they will be." But it's not; we do say that things
are just labelled what they are, but for the label to be applied, the basis that
gets it must be a reasonable one for the particular label.

BTAGS PA DE'ANG KHYAD CHOS GSUM LDAN ZHIG DGOS, KHYAD CHOS GSUM NI, THA SNYAD PA'I SHES PA LA GRAGS PA YIN PA DANG , DE LA THA SNYAD PA'I TSAD MA GZHAN GYIS MI 
GNOD PA, DON DAM DPYOD BYED KYI RIGS PAS KYANG MI GNOD PA STE DE GSUM DANG LDAN DGOS,
When we apply a label, three conditions must be present. The three are as
follows: (1) the object must be known to a conventional perception; (2) no other
conventional perception can contradict its existence; and (3) no ultimate
analysis can contradict its existence either. All three must be there.

THA SNYAD PA'I TSAD MA GZHAN GYIS GNOD TSUL YANG RGYANG RING PO'I THO YOR LTA BU LA GZHAN ZHIG GIS PHA GI MI ZHIG YIN ZHES SMRAS PAS DE YID CHES KYANG , THO YOR DNGOS SU NGES PA'I MI ZHIG GIS DE THO YOR YIN PAR SMRAS PA NA, SNGA MA'I THO YOR MIR BZUNG BA DE GTAN YAL DU 'GRO BA NI GDAGS GZHI TSAD MA MIN PA'I RTAGS RED,
Now here is what we mean when we say that one conventional perception has
been contradicted by another. We can be standing looking at a scarecrow way
off in the distance, and someone next to us says "That's a man over there," and
we believe him. Then someone comes up who's seen for himself that the thing
is a scarecrow and tells us "It's just a scarecrow." Our initial perception of the
thing as a man then vanishes. This is an indication that the basis was not a
reasonable one for the given name.

DER MA ZAD, RI BONG LA RVA YOD CES PHAR BTAGS KYANG GDAGS GZHI TSAD MA MIN PAS DER GRUB TU MED, DE LTAR NA THA SNYAD KYI BLO TSAD MAS GDAGS GZHI YANG DE DANG DE'I TSOGS PA TSAD MA DNGOS SU YOD PA ZHIG LA BTAGS DGOS,
That's not all--we can go around giving out all sorts of names, we can say
"Rabbits have horns," but that's not going to make the horns exist; there's no
reasonable basis to get the label. Therefore we must have a reasonable,
conventional state of mind that is applying a name to a reasonable collection
of parts which acts as the basis we want to give the name--and which actually
exists.

DES NA YUL GYI DPON PO YANG 'OS PA'I MI GDAGS GZHI TSAD MA ZHIG LA BTAGS PA LAS, MO RANG MA'I BU GLEN LKUGS LTA BU LA DPON DU MI BSKO BA YIN,
Thus too when we go to name somebody governor of a district we have to
have a person who is suitable to be given the name--we must have a
reasonable basis for our label. We don't take some deaf-mute bastard kid and
appoint him governor.

DE THAMS CAD RANG NGOS NAS GRUB NA GDAGS GZHI'I TSOGS PA LA BLTOS MI DGOS PAR RANG RANG GI NGOS NAS TSUR GRUB PA ZHIG DGOS KYANG , DE LTAR MIN PAR GDAGS GZHI TSOGS PA LA BLTOS NAS GRUB DGOS PAS NA RANG NGOS NAS MA GRUB PA DANG , RANG BZHIN GYIS MA GRUB PA, BDEN PAR MA GRUB PA RED,
If any of these things existed from its own side, it wouldn't have to rely on the
group of parts we give its name, and then each one would have to exist out
there, on its own. But that's not the way it is: they can only exist in
dependence on the group of parts we give their name. And this is why they
do not exist from their own side, and they do not exist naturally, and they do
not exist truly.

DPER NA YUL GYI RGAN PO YANG PHAR BTAGS NAS GRUB PA LAS, KHO RANG GI NGOS NAS TSUR GRUB PA MED KYANG , RANG TSOS RGAN PO KHO RANG GI NGOS NAS TSUR GRUB PA LTAR SNANG ZHING ZHEN PA LTAR GRUB PA DE DGAG BYA YIN,
We can take some local chieftain; he is chief only so far as we on our part call
him "chief," and not out there from his own side. To us though the chief
appears to exist out there on his own, and we take him to be this way. A chief
that could exist as we take him to is just what we want to see does not exist.
 DE BZHIN DU NGA DE YANG LUS SEMS GNYIS KYI NGOS NAS TSUR GRUB PA MED PAR, GDAGS GZHI TSOGS PA LA SGRA RTOG GIS THA SNYAD TZAM DU PHAR BTAGS TZAM GYIS SNANG RGYU YOD TZAM ZHIG YOD,
This "me" is the same way too. It is not something that exists out there on top
of my body and mind. Rather, it is only something that appears to me only
because I have applied the name: I have taken the collection of parts and put
upon them the label and concept of "me": the "me" is only in name.

BTAGS LUGS KYANG PHAR NGOS NAS GDAGS GZHI DE GRUB, TSUR NGOS NAS 'DOGS BYED RTOG PA DANG SGRA GNYIS KYIS BTAGS TZAM PA DE YIN,
The process of labelling occurs like this. The basis to be given the name exists
out there. From our side come the concept that applies the name and the
name itself. We come out then with something labelled--and it's nothing more
than that.

KHANG PA LTA BUR MTSON NA, KHANG PA GSAR PA BZO DBYIBS BKOD PA LEGS PA 'DRA 'DRA GSUM GSAR DU BZOS YOD NA DE GSUM SO SOR MING MA BTAGS PA'I SNGA ROL TU DANG PO NAS GZIM CHUNG SOGS SU MA GRUB KYANG , KHANG PA'I BDAG PO DES 'DI GZIM CHUNG YIN, 'DI RUNG KHANG YIN ZHES PA LTA BU MING GIS PHAR BTAGS PA NA GZHI NAS 'DI GZIM CHUNG NGO , , 'DI RUNG KHANG NGO SNYAM PA SOGS DE DANG DE SO SOR GRUB, GDAGS GZHI KHANG PA GSUM TSOGS KYANG 'DOGS BYED KYIS PHAR MA BTAGS NA MI GRUB PAS KHANG PA DE YANG MING DANG RTOG PAS BTAGS PA TZAM YIN, DES NA KHANG PA TZAM MA YIN PAR CHOS GANG DANG GANG YANG GDAGS GZHI LA MI BYED PAR BTAGS CHOS DE LA BYA DGOS,
We can illustrate this with a building. Say that someone has just put up three
new buildings, each with the same attractive design. They cannot be the
"sleeping quarters" or anything else from the very beginning, before they are
given their separate names. But then the owner comes and puts a different
name on each building: he says, "This one will serve as the sleeping quarters,
and this one will be the kitchen facility," and so on. Only after this do we
think to ourselves, "These are the sleeping quarters," or "This is the kitchen
facility"--and only then do each of them exist as such. We can have a basis to
get the name--the group of buildings--but until the one to give them the name

actually does so, they're not the three. Thus a building too is nothing more
than something labelled with a name and a concept. And we are talking about
more than just some building; the point is that any existent entity is just the
same: we must take it to be a product of the labelling process, and not the
basis which receives our label.

DE BZHIN DU THA SNYAD PA'I NGA DE RTOG PAS PHAR BTAGS TZAM YIN KYANG , NGED TSO LA PHAR BTAGS TZAM MIN PAR NGA KHO RANG GI NGOS NAS TSUR DGA' SDUG SOGS THAMS CAD SHUGS CAN MYONG MKHAN GYI LING LING PO ZHIG SHAR, DE 'DZIN MKHAN GYI BLO DE BDEN 'DZIN LHAN SKYES SAM, 'JIG LTA LHAN SKYES YIN, DE LTAR 'DZIN PA'I NGA TSUGS THUB LING NGE BA DE DGAG BYA'I BDAG YIN, 'DI LA DPAL LDAN ZLA BA GRAGS PAS KYANG ,
This applies equally to the conventional "me"--it only exists insofar as I label
it with some concept. You and I tend to think of "me" as something more than
just a creation of names; we have this vivid mental image of him out there on
his own, the intimate experiencer of all that he feels, pleasure or pain or
whatever. The state of mind that clutches to "me" this way is what we call
"inborn grasping to a self," or the "inborn destructible view."163
And the oh-so-
vivid, self-standing "me" that this state of mind clings to is the self that we
must come to see does not exist. As the glorious Chandrakirti has said as well,
 DE LA BDAG CES BYA BA NI GANG ZHIG DNGOS PO RNAMS KYI GZHAN LA RAG MA LAS PA'I NGO BO RANG BZHIN TE DE MED PA NI BDAG MED PA'O, , ZHES GSUNGS,
Here what we call "self" refers to any nature or state objects
could have in which they relied on nothing else. The non-
existence of this is what we call "no-self."164

THA SNYAD PA'I NGA NI GDAGS GZHI DANG 'DOGS BYED LA BRTEN NAS PHAR BTAGS PA TZAM YIN TE, 'JIGS BYED SKABS CHOS THAMS CAD BRTEN NAS BTAGS PA YIN PA'I PHYIR, ZHES DANG , BDE MCHOG LAS KUN RTOG GIS BTAGS PA TZAM GYI SGYU MA LTA BU'O, , ZHES GSUNGS PA SOGS KYANG DON 'DI LA DGONGS PA RED,
Now the conventional "me"--the one that does exist--is only something we've
created with a label, using some basis to take the label and some idea to give
the label. This is what those lines in the ritual for the secret Frightener
teaching are referring to as they start off, "Since every object is labelled, in
dependence..."165
The same sentiment is expressed, among other places, in the
ritual for the secret teaching of Highest Bliss: "Like an illusion, just labelled
with a concept."166

ZHIB TU BYAS NA SNANG TSUL LA MA DPYAD PAR ZHEN TSUL LA DPYAD DGOS PAS DGAG BYA YANG SNANG YUL MI BKAG PAR, ZHEN YUL BKAG DGOS, 'DI DAG LA RTZA TSIG LTA BU,
If we really get into fine detail, we must analyze not the way that objects
appear to us, but rather how we grasp them. Thus it is too with the object we
want to see does not exist: it is not that we will deny what appears to us, but
rather what we grasp. This then can be like our refrain:

RTOG PAS PHAR BTAGS YIN PA, GDAGS GZHI DANG 'DOGS BYED LA BRTEN DGOS PA, RKYEN GZHAN LA BRTEN NAS BYUNG BA, RANG NGOS NAS MA GRUB PA RNAMS NGES DGOS,
Let me realize that these things are labelled,
creations of concepts;
That they can exist only in dependence on a basis
to receive a name and someone to give the
name;
That they occur in dependence on many
other factors;
That they don't exist out there, on their own.

DGAG BYA'I ZHEN YUL YANG ZHEN YUL DE YOD MED BRTAG PA'I SKABS SU PHAR BTAGS PA'I NGA DE MIN PA'I NGA KHO RANG GI NGOS NAS TSUR GRUB PA LTA BU ZHIG 'CHAR BAS, NGA DE LUS SEMS LA BRTEN NAS BTAGS PA TZAM MA YIN PAR, LUS SEMS GNYIS KYI STENG NAS TSUR GRUB PA DE ZHEN YUL YIN,
Let's talk then about the thing we will see does not exist, in terms of the object
we grasp. When we start to examine whether it exists or not, the image that
comes to our mind is not the "me" that we have created with our labels, but

rather some "me" that looks like it exists out there, on his own. The object we
grasp therefore consists not of the "me" which is nothing but a label applied
to our body and mind, but rather of the "me" which seems to exist out there
on its own, on top of the body and the mind together.

DPER NA THAG KHRA LA MUN PA BABS PA MTHONG BA NA DANG POR THAG KHRA LA SBRUL LO SNYAM DU PHAR BTAGS, DE RJES PHAR BTAGS PA DE BRJED NAS THAG KHRA'I NGOS NAS SBRUL TSUR GRUB PAR SNANG BAS DE LTAR SNANG BA DE DGAG BYA MA YIN, DE LTAR SNANG BA LTAR DU GRUB PAR 'DZIN PA'I ZHEN YUL DE DGAG BYA YIN PA BZHIN DU,
Let's say for example that dusk has fallen and you see some piece of rope with
a checkered pattern. At first you put a name onto it and think to yourself, "Oh
my! A snake!" After that you forget it was you who put the name on it and
it starts to look like a snake out there on its own. The way that it looks just
then is not what we want to see doesn't exist. Rather what we want to deny
is what we grasp: that the thing we hold could really exist the way it looks to
us to exist.

NGA LA DPYAD PA BYED PA'I TSE YANG RANG GI MING NAS 'BOD MKHAN LTA BU BYUNG BA NA NGA LA BOS SNYAM DU DANG POR THA SNYAD PA'I NGA DE SHAR, DE RJES KHYOD RKUN MA YIN LTA BU ZER NA, NGA DE SHUGS CHE RU SONG STE NGAS RKUN MA MA BYAS PAR NGA LA BSNYON 'DZUGS, NGAS NAD MI THEG SNYAM DU NGA DANG NGA ZHES TSUGS THUB LING NGE BA'I NGA DE SHAR BAS,
It's just the same when we investigate this idea of "me." Suppose someone
comes up and calls you out by name. At first the "me" that appears to you is
simply the conventional one: you think to yourself, "He's calling me." But then
he says to you, "So you're the thief!" or something like that. Then your "me"
starts getting stronger and stronger; you start thinking to yourself "Why is he
pointing the finger at me? It wasn't me who stole it. They can't blame ME!"
You start saying "me" "me" and the "me" starts looking like a "me" that can
stand on its own, a very vivid "me."

DE LTAR NGA THA SNYAD DU SNANG TZAM DE YANG MI BKAG, NGA TSUGS THUB BDEN GRUB TU SNANG BA 
DE YANG MI BKAG, TSUGS THUB BDEN GRUB TU SNANG BA'I NGA DE YANG MI DGAG PAR, NGA TSUGS THUB TU GRUB PA'AM, NGA RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA'AM, RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA'I NGA DE BKAG NAS,
Now we are not denying the existence of the ordinary, conventional "me" that
first appeared to you. Nor are we denying that "me" appeared to stand on its
own, that it appeared to truly exist. We are not even denying the "me" that
appears to stand on its own, the "me" that appears to truly exist. Rather we
are denying that "me" could actually stand on its own, that "me" could actually
exist naturally: we are denying any "me" that could actually naturally exist.

LUS SEMS GNYIS LA MA BRTEN PAR NGA KHO RANG GI NGOS NAS GRUB PA LING LING PO DE MED PAR STONG CHAM GYIS SONG BA NA DBU MA'I LTA BA DANG POR RNYED PAR GSUNGS PAS, DES RGYAL BA DGYES PA'I LAM RNYED PA YIN,
And when you deny this "me," when you see that this "me" does not
exist--when for your this so-vivid "me" that stands out there on his own
without relying on the two of mind and body ceases to be, and all that's left
is simple emptiness of him, then as the sages say you have first found the
"view of the middle way." And then you have found the "path that pleases the
Victors."

DE LTAR BSKYANGS TE BRTAGS DON BTZAL NA CHOS THAMS CAD NGO BOS GRUB PA RDUL TZAM YANG MI RNYED KYANG , THA SNYAD DU SNANG RGYU YOD TZAM GYI RGYU 'BRAS BYA BYED TSANG MA BSNYON MED DU 'THAD DE,
When you do this sort of analysis, and you seek the thing with the name, you
will never be able to find a single atom of anything in the universe that exists
in itself. All the normal workings of the world though are quite logical and
proper; things make other things happen, things do what they do, though all
in only an apparent way, in a conventionally agreed-upon way.

DPER NA, KHANG PA BDEN PAR GRUB PA RDUL TZAM MED KYANG KHANG PA'I RGYU RKYEN TSOGS TE 
MING DANG RTOG PAS BTAGS TZAM DU GRUB PA NA KHANG PA'I BYA BYED THAMS CAD BSLU MED DU NUS PA DANG , ME LONG NANG GI BYAD BZHIN GYI GZUGS BRNYAN BLO LA SNANG BA TZAM DANG SGRAS BRJOD PA TZAM LAS 'DI YIN ZHES NGOS BZUNG BRAL YANG GZUGS BRNYAN SNANG BA TZAM DE'I STENG DU NAG NOG YOD MED SOGS RGYU 'BRAS KYI BYA BZHAG THAMS CAD 'THAD PA BZHIN NO, , DE'I PHYIR THA SNYAD DU YOD PAS YOD GO CHOD CING , DON DAM DU MED PAS MED GO MI CHOD PA YIN,
A building for example can be without a single atom of "true" existence, and
yet so long as the causes and conditions for the building have come
together--so long as it exists solely by virtue of a name and our concept of
it--then it can do everything a building is supposed to do, and perfectly so.
The reflection of some object in a mirror too may never be more than just
something that appears to the mind and gets itself a name, it may never win
any endorsement as being the object itself, but it can still exhibit all the normal
workings of causation; the reflection may be nothing more than an apparition,
but it can still show you whether you have a spot on your face, or whatever.
This then is why we say that "to exist, it's enough to exist conventionally; but
not existing ultimately, is not enough to not exist."

RTEN 'BYUNG GI DON 'DI LEGS PAR SHES NA LAS 'BRAS LA NGES PA SHUGS DRAG PO RNYED DE LAS 'BRAS LA RTZIS CHE RU 'GRO ,
Any person who really understands interdependence in the sense that we've
just described it begins to develop a strong recognition of the laws of actions
and their consequences--they become more and more important for him.

DE YIN TE, RGYU DGE SDIG LAS 'BRAS BU BDE SDUG SO SOR MA 'CHOL BAR 'BYUNG BA RTEN 'BREL LAS BYUNG ZHING ,
And this is why. First of all, good deeds lead to pleasure and bad deeds lead
to pain; each cause is connected to its own result--it can never go wrong
somehow and produce the other result. This invariable relationship comes
from interdependence.

RTEN 'BREL GYI DON RANG BZHIN MED PAR SHES PA NA THA SNYAD TZAM DU RTEN 'BYUNG RGYU 'BRAS BSLU MED DU 'THAD PAR SHUGS KYIS GO STE 'KHOR 'DAS KYI LAS 'BRAS LA NGES PA GTING NAS RNYED PA ZHIG 'ONG ,
Once you understand the sense in which "interdependence" refers to lack of
any natural existence, then you understand by implication that
interdependence in the form of cause and effect is, in a merely conventional
way, entirely proper or infallible. This then allows you to gain a total
conviction towards the laws that govern all actions and consequences--whether
they be those within the circle of life or those that are beyond it.

DE YANG TSOGS PA GZHAN LA BRTEN PAS NA RANG BZHIN GYIS MA GRUB PA DANG , RANG BZHIN GYIS MA GRUB PAS NA RGYU 'BRAS 'THAD PA 'DI BYUNG BA YIN, RGYU 'BRAS KYI BYA BYED THAMS CAD 'THAD PA LA BRTEN NAS SA BON MYU GU DANG , MYU GU 'BRAS BUR 'GYUR BA SOGS BYUNG BA RED,
We can say then that, because it depends on some other group of things, no
object can exist naturally. And the fact that nothing exists naturally is what
makes cause and effect perfectly plausible. And the fact that all the workings
of cause and effect are perfectly plausible is what allows seeds to turn to
sprouts, and sprouts to grains, and all the rest.

GZHAN DU NA NAS RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB NA NAS MYU GU 'GYUR BA SOGS DANG , GZHON NU RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB NA GZHON NU RGAN POR 'GYUR BA SOGS MI 'BYUNG LA, BDE 'GRO RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB NA BDE 'GRO BA DMYAL BAR 'GRO BA MI SRID CING , SEMS CAN RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB NA SEMS CAN SANGS RGYAS PAR MI SRID PA SOGS KYI SKYON MANG ,
Suppose this were not the case, and seeds of barley or whatever existed
naturally--then they could never turn into sprouts. Neither could children
ever turn into adults, or anything of the like ever occur, if they all existed
naturally. If the higher births existed naturally, then it would be impossible
for a person in a higher birth to fall into the hells. If ordinary living beings

existed naturally, then it would be impossible for such a being to become a
Buddha, and so forth--the logical problems of being something "naturally" are
many.

DES NA RGYU 'BRAS RTEN 'BYUNG DANG , RANG BZHIN GYIS MED PA GNYIS GCIG GROGS SU GCIG 'GRO BA 'DI DBU MA THAL 'GYUR BA'I KHYAD CHOS THUN MONG MA YIN PA YIN GSUNGS,
What we've said above, concluded our Lama, conveys a teaching which is
therefore unique to the "Implication" section of the Middle Way school: that
these two principles--cause and effect, or interdependence, and the fact that
nothing exists naturally--go hand in hand, each supporting the other.

Notes to Reading Nine
143. path of preparation: Another set of five paths, or levels of realization, is
described in Buddhism. Included are the paths of accumulation, preparation,
seeing, habituation, and "no more learning." The five for the "greater" way
differ from those of the "lesser" way (see note 56).
144. all eight levels: Refers to intensely deep forms of meditation that lead to
later births in the eight sections of the form and formless realms, which are still
counted as suffering (see note 14).
145. The worldly meditate on concentration... The verse is found on ff. 44a-44b of
this famous teaching of the Buddha (see entry 23). The following citation is the
next verse in the sutra, from f. 44b. The wording of the edition available to us
is slightly different, but the intent equal. Udraka was a non-Buddhist sage
who woke from an extended period of meditation and went into a rage
because mice had in the meantime chewed away at his impressive yogi's locks
of hair; because of his anger, he was then born in the hells.
146. There is no second door... Quotation from f. 13b of Master Aryadeva's work
(see entry 40 and note 79).
147. Wisdom not steeped in method... The lines appear on f. 313a of this
well-known sutra, and are clarified by it immediately afterward (see entry 35).
148. By this virtue may all beings... Final lines of the Master's Sixty Verses of
Reasoning, and often used nowadays as a prayer of dedication after the good
deed of listening to a teaching. Original from f. 22b, entry 5.
149. On vast wide-spreading wings... Quotation on f. 212a of Entering the Middle
Way (see entry 74 and note 129).
150. Understanding that Has No End: A famed teaching of the Buddha requested
by a disciple of this name (entry 49). The Root Wisdom of Master Nagarjuna
(c. 200 A.D.) is listed at entry 4; for other works of his famed "Collection," see
the biography in the English translation of his Letter to a Friend (p. 10, entry 95).
151. the masters Buddhapalita, etc.: For the commentary of Master Buddhapalita
(c. 500 A.D.), see entry 85. Master Aryadeva's work has already been listed
(see note 79), as has Master Chandrakirti's Entering the Middle Way (note 129).
For A Clarification of the Words, see entry 73.

152. There's no way to peace... From the sixth chapter of Master Chandrakirti's
work (f. 205a, entry 74). Briefly, the "two truths" mentioned are what are
usually called "deceptive truth" and "ultimate truth." Both are valid, and all
objects have both. The dependence of objects (especially in the sense described
below, upon concepts and names) is their conventional or deceptive truth.
Their appearance is "deceptive" because to the minds of normal people they
appear to be something other than what they actually are. The "ultimate" (here
called "real") truth of objects is their lack of non-dependence, and is first seen
directly in the all-important meditative state known as the "path of seeing."
Seeing this truth directly acts immediately to stop the process through which
we suffer.
153. Nagarjuna's student was Chandrakirti... The lines are from his work on the
two truths; see f. 72a, entry 56.
154. "Detailist" school: So called because "they devote their study exclusively to
the classical commentary known as Detailed Exposition, or else because they
understand the Exposition's meaning" (the First Dalai Lama, entry 14, p. 14).
155. "Scripturalist" school: The name is said to come from the fact that "this
school of philosophers holds that scripture [eg. sutra] is valid, but denies the
validity of classical commentaries such as the Seven Works on Knowledge"
(ibid).
156. "Mind-Only" school: The name comes from the school's assertion that
"every existing object is nothing but part of the mind," although this general
description is further refined by the school.
157. made from any different "substance": That is, come from any different
principal cause or latency.
158. "Independent" part of the Middle Way school: The school is so named because
its followers advocate a middle way which avoids the extreme of thinking
things exist (naturally) and the extreme of thinking things can't exist (if they
don't exist naturally). The "Independents" are one of the two parts of the
school; they believe one must lead a person to the correct view that things are
empty of natural existence by means of taking an independent object and
discussing it in common terms--rather than starting from the person's own
incorrect view and demonstrating the absurdity that it necessarily implies.
These points are illuminated by the great Changkya Rolpay Dorje, said to be
a former life of Pabongka Rinpoche himself, in his Comparative Systems (pp.
289, 305, 325; entry 80).
159. unaffected awareness: Any normal, "reasonable" perception--the vast majority

of our everyday perceptions; the opposite would be those infrequent cases
where we take something wrong, such as mistaking a moving leaf for a small
animal as we drive a car, or believing in something unreal that we think we
see under the influence of alcohol or a drug.
160. "Implication" section of the Middle Way school: So named because of their
belief that a line of reasoning which implies a necessary absurdity in an
opponent's incorrect view on the subject is sufficient to inspire in his mind the
correct view of the nature of existence (again see Changkya Rolpay Dorje, p.
407, entry 80).
161. "Functionalist" group: Refers collectively to the Detailist, Scripturalist, and
Mind-Only schools, since all assert that functional things exist truly.
162. the fourfold analysis: Briefly, Pabongka Rinpoche lists the four as follows in
his treatise on the Steps (entry 47, ff. 362-377):
1) Identify what you deny: any object that could exist truly. You cannot
catch a thief if you don't know what he looks like.
2) Recognize the necessity: that if an object exists truly, it must be truly
one or truly many.
3) Perceive that it is not truly one: if you were truly your parts, you
couldn't say "parts," since you are only one.
4) Perceive that it is not truly many: if your parts were truly you, then
when you took any one part it would be you--the same way you
get a cow when you have a goat and a sheep and a cow and take
out the goat and the sheep.
The conclusion is that since you are neither truly one nor truly many, you do
not truly exist. Lord Tsongkapa discusses these points on ff. 374-475 of his
greater Steps (entry 61).
163. destructible view: This way of looking at things is called "destructible" both
because it focuses on me, and I will one day perish, and because the wrong
view itself will one day be corrected and disappear.
164. Here what we call a self... Quotation from his commentary on the 400 Verses
of Master Aryadeva (note 79). See f. 187b, entry 72.
165. Since every object is labelled... Found on p. 396 of entry 45.
166. Like an illusion... The full line is found of f. 16a of the work, entry 70.

211
The Asian Classics Institute
Course I: The Principal Teachings of Buddhism
Reading Ten
XVI. How to Know When Your Analysis is Still Incomplete

GSUM PA LTA BA'I DPYAD PA MA RDZOGS PA'I TSAD NI,
The third of the five sections in our treatment of correct view explains how to
know when the analysis you are conducting with the view you have is still
incomplete. This point is brought out in the next verse of the root text:

,SNANG BA RTEN 'BREL BSLU BA MED PA DANG ,
,STONG PA KHAS LEN BRAL BA'I GO BA GNYIS,
,JI SRID SO SOR SNANG BA DE SRID DU,
,DA DUNG THUB PA'I DGONGS PA RTOGS PA MED,
,CES PAS BSTAN,
(11)
You've yet to realize the thought of the Able
As long as two ideas seem to you disparate:
The appearance of things--infallible interdependence;
And emptiness--beyond taking any position.

DE LTAR BSGOMS PAS LTA BA'I DPYAD PA RDZOGS NA RTEN 'BREL DANG STONG PA GNYIS GCIG GROGS GCIG TU 'CHAR BA ZHIG DGOS KYANG ,
Let's say you've meditated on the instructions we've given above. You are
directing your view to analyze all phenomena. If your analysis is really
complete, then interdependence and emptiness must appear to you to go hand
in hand, supporting each other.

DE NI RGYA GAR BA KHA CIG DANG BOD SNGA MA TSO LTAR RANG BZHIN MED PA GO MDOG MDOG BYAS KYANG RTEN 'BREL 'JOG LUGS MA SHES PA LTA BU,
Despite this fact, it appears that people like some of the ancient Indian sages,
and the earlier Tibetan Buddhists as well, who made it seem like they had
grasped the concept of no self-nature nonetheless did not understand how to
explain interdependence.

SNANG BA RTEN CING 'BREL 'BYUNG DANG , STONG PA RANG BZHIN GYIS MED PA GNYIS PHYOGS RE TZAM DU SHES KYANG DE GNYIS GZHI GCIG GI STENG DU 'GAL 'DUR SONG STE,
What the verse is saying then, concluded our Lama, is this: "Suppose you do
have some understanding of the two concepts individually: of (1) the
'appearance of things,' or interdependence, and (2) emptiness--the fact that
nothing exists naturally. But suppose to you they seem like contradictory
characteristics--you think that no object could possess one, and still possess the
other.

RGYU LAS 'BRAS BU MI 'CHOL BAR 'BYUNG BA'I RTEN 'BREL BSLU BA MED PA DANG , CHOS THAMS CAD RANG GI NGO BOS GRUB PA RDUL TZAM YANG MED PA'I STONG PA KHAS LEN DANG BRAL BA'I GO BA GNYIS PO   
"Consider these two ideas: (1) infallible interdependence, where causes (that is,
actions) of a certain kind must always lead to results (consequences) of the
same kind; and (2) emptiness, the idea beyond taking any position--the fact that
no existent object in the universe contains a single atom of something that can
exist on its own.

   DE DUS NAM ZHIG BAR PHAN TSUN TSA GRANG LTAR SO SOR 'GAL BAR SNANG BA DE SRID DU DA DUNG THUB PA'I DGONGS PA'I DON MTHAR THUG PA DE PHYIN CI MA LOG PAR MA RTOGS ZHES PA YIN GSUNGS,
"For such time as they appear this way to you--so long as the two ideas seem
to you mutually exclusive, like hot and cold--then you've yet to realize perfectly
the ultimate point of the thought of the Able Ones, the Buddhas."
XVII. How to Know When Your Analysis is Complete

BZHI PA LTA BA'I DPYAD PA RDZOGS PA'I TSAD NI,
This brings us to the fourth section: how to know when the analysis you are
performing with the view you've developed is complete. This is explained in
the next verse of the root text:

,NAM ZHIG RES 'JOG MED PAR CIG CAR DU,
,RTEN 'BREL MI BSLUR MTHONG BA TZAM NYID NAS,
,NGES SHES YUL GYI 'DZIN STANGS KUN 'JIG NA,
,DE TSE LTA BA'I DPYAD PA RDZOGS PA LAGS,
,ZHES PAS BSTAN,
(12)
At some point they no longer alternate,
come together;
Just seeing that interdependence never fails
Brings realization that destroys how you
hold to objects,
And then your analysis with view is complete.

DE YANG NAM ZHIG RES 'JOG MED PA ZHES CHOS THAMS CAD LA MING RKYANG BTAGS YOD TZAM GYI DGE SDIG BYA BYED THAMS CAD 'THAD PA DANG , BTAGS DON BTZAL BA'I TSE NA CHOS DE DANG DE RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA RDUL TZAM YANG MED PA'I STONG PA GNYIS   
Now here's what we mean when we say that "at some point they no longer
alternate." We take two things: first, the fact that everything about the way
things work, and about good deeds and bad deeds, is perfectly proper, despite

the fact that no single object is anything more than labels, just names.
Secondly there is the fact that, when we try to seek out the thing that got the
name, we find only emptiness: that there is not a single atom of natural
existence in whatever object we have chosen.

   RES 'JOG MIN PAR CIG CAR DU 'JOG THUB PA BYUNG NA STONG PA DANG RTEN 'BYUNG GNYIS GZHI GCIG LA 'GAL MED DU 'JOG SHES SHING ,
At some point you gain an ability to explain these two facts so that they come
together, and no longer alternate. That is, you come to realize how both
emptiness and interdependence can apply to one and the same object, with no
contradiction at all.

GDAGS GZHI'I TSOGS PA LA BRTEN NAS RTOG PAS PHAR BTAGS TZAM GYI RTEN 'BYUNG BSLU BA MED PAR MTHONG BA TZAM NYID NAS BDEN 'DZIN GYI 'DZIN STANGS GTAN MED DU RTOGS TE STONG PA RTEN 'BYUNG DANG , RTEN 'BYUNG STONG PAR SHAR BA ZHIG YOD, DAM PA 'GA'I ZHAL NAS, RTEN 'BREL GYI GNAD SHES NA STONG NYID KYI DON LHANG LA 'BUD GSUNGS PA YANG 'DI LA DGONGS PA RED,
You see then that interdependence is infallible, that it is nothing but using a
concept to label the collection of parts that serve as the basis to take our label.
Just seeing this fact, that interdependence never fails, brings you a realization that
completely obviates the way that your tendency to grasp to true existence holds
its objects. And then when you think of emptiness, you see interdependence;
when you think of interdependence, you see emptiness. This is by the way
what certain holy sages have meant when they said, "Once you grasp the secret
of interdependence, the meaning of emptiness comes in a flash."167

DE LTAR BYUNG NA RTEN 'BREL GYI DON BDEN PAR MED PAR RTOGS LA, BDEN PAR MED PA'I DON DES RTEN 'BREL BSLU BA MED PA LA NGES PA SHUGS DRAG 'DREN THUB PAS DE NI DBU MA THAL 'GYUR BA'I LTA BA'I DPYAD PA RDZOGS PA YIN ZHING , KLU SGRUB KYI DGONGS PA THUN MONG MA YIN PA'ANG 'DI YIN GSUNGS,
Once all this happens to you, you come to realize that the point of
interdependence is that nothing exists truly. And this point itself, that nothing
exists truly, has the power then of bringing out in your mind a strong and
certain realization that interdependence never fails. And then you know that
the analysis you are performing, now using the pure view of the "Implication"
section of the Middle Way school, is finally complete. We can also say,
concluded our Lama, that you have then found the unique thought of
Nagarjuna himself.
XVIII. A Unique Teaching of the "Implication" School

,GZHAN YANG SNANG BAS YOD MTHA' SEL BA DANG ,
,STONG PAS MED MTHA' SEL ZHING STONG PA NYID,
,RGYU DANG 'BRAS BUR 'CHAR BA'I TSUL SHES NA,
,MTHAR 'DZIN LTA BAS 'PHROG PAR MI 'GYUR RO,
,ZHES PAS BSTAN TE,
The fifth and final section in our explanation of correct view concerns a unique
teaching followed by the "Implication" group of the Middle Way school. This
instruction is contained in the following verse of the root text.
(13)
In addition, the appearance prevents the
existence extreme;
Emptiness that of non-existence, and if
You see how emptiness shows in cause
and effect
You'll never be stolen off by extreme views.

THAL 'GYUR BA MIN PA TSOS SNANG BAS MED MTHA' DANG , STONG PAS YOD MTHA' SEL BAR BZHED KYANG ,
Now all the schools except for the members of the "Implication" group hold
that an understanding of the appearance of things prevents you from falling
into what we call the "extreme of thinking things do not exist," while an
understanding of emptiness prevents you from falling into what is known as
the "extreme of thinking things do exist."

THAL 'GYUR BA'I LUGS LA CHOS GANG DANG GANG YIN KYANG SNANG BA TZAM LAS BDEN PAR MA GRUB PAS DON DAM DU YOD PA'I YOD MTHA' DANG , SNANG BA TZAM DE RANG GI NGOS NAS MA GRUB PA LA BRTEN NAS STONG PAS THA SNYAD DU MED PA'I MED MTHA' SEL BA YIN,
The position of the Implication group though is that no particular object you
can choose has any true existence, aside from merely appearing this way; and
understanding this prevents you from going to the extreme of thinking things
exist--that is, exist in an ultimate way. And because this mere appearance
itself cannot exist on its own, an understanding of emptiness prevents your
falling into the extreme of thinking things do not exist--that is, do not exist in
a conventional way.

RTEN 'BREL YIN PHYIN CHAD RANG BZHIN GYIS MA GRUB PA'AM RANG TSUGS MA THUB PA LAS GZHAN DU 'GRO SA MED DE, GDAGS GZHI'I TSOGS PA LA BRTEN NAS 'BYUNG DGOS PA'I PHYIR, DPER NA, MI RGAN 'KHOG GIS RANG KHER LANGS MA THUB PAR GZHAN LA BRTEN NAS LDANG DGOS PA NI RANG GIS TSUGS MA THUB PA YIN PA LTAR RKYEN GZHAN ZHIG LA BRTEN DGOS TSAD RANG BZHIN GYIS TSUGS MA THUB PA YIN,
Once something is interdependent there is no possibility for it to be anything
else but something which does not exist naturally--something which cannot
stand on its own. This is because it must then occur in dependence on the
collection of parts which serve as the basis that receives our label. Look at the
example of some feeble old man, unable to rise from his chair by himself, who
must seek some other support to get up--he cannot stand on his own. Here
it's a similar case: no object can stand on its own, no object can exist just
naturally, so long as it must depend on any other factor.

SPYIR BDAG MED PA'I DON GTAN LA 'BEB PA'I RIGS PA MANG DU YOD KYANG , RIGS PA'I RGYAL PO LTA BU NI RTEN 'BREL GYI RIGS PA 'DI YIN,
Generally speaking, there are a great number of logical proofs that can be used
when you want to establish the meaning of no self-nature. There is one
though which is like the king of them all, and this is it: the "proof through
interdependence." Let's say we put forth this argument to someone, and we
say:

DE YANG , MYU GU CHOS CAN, BDEN PAR MA GRUB STE, RTEN 'BREL YIN PA'I PHYIR, CES RTAGS BKOD NA,
Consider a sprout.
It cannot exist truly,
For it is interdependent.

'DI LA PHYI ROL PAS NI CHOS THAMS CAD SPYI GTZO BO'I RNAM 'GYUR DU 'DOD DE RTAGS MA GRUB KYI LAN BYED,
Members of certain non-Buddhist schools will answer "I disagree with your
reason," which is to say, "Sprouts are not interdependent." This they must say
because they believe that every object in the universe is a manifestation of
some primeval One.

BOD SNGA RABS PA PHAL CHE BAS GTAN MED DU 'DOD PAS CHAD MTHAR LHUNG , SEMS TZAM PA MAN GYI RANG SDE DNGOS SMRA THAMS CAD KYIS RANG BZHIN GYIS MA GRUB NA RTEN 'BREL 'JOG MA SHES PAS RTAG MTHAR LHUNG , RANG RGYUD PAS RTEN 'BYUNG KHAS LEN KYANG RTEN 'BREL YIN NA RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS MA GRUB PA'I KHYAB PA MI BZHED PAS DE YANG RTAG MTHAR SONG ,
The majority of the earlier Tibetan Buddhists fell into the extreme that we call
"thinking things have stopped," for they would say that if something did not
exist truly it could not exist at all. The schools from the Mind-Only on down,

the group of schools known collectively as the "Functionalists," all fall into the
extreme of "thinking things are permanent," for they cannot explain
interdependence if they accept that nothing exists naturally. Members of the
"Independent" group within the Middle Way school accept the idea of
interdependence, but do not agree that if something is interdependent it cannot
"exist by definition." This too is tantamount to the extreme of thinking things
are permanent.

MKHAS PA DBU MA PAS NI RANG BZHIN GYIS MED KYANG GTAN NAS MED PA MA YIN PA DANG , THA SNYAD TZAM DU YOD KYANG RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD PA MA YIN PA'I DBYE BA BZHIR PHYE, DNGOS SMRA BA SOGS KYI 'KHRUL GZHI YOD MED BZHI PO 'DI MA PHYED PA'I SKYON YIN,
The real sages of the Middle Way school make a fourfold distinction: they say
that nothing exists naturally, but not that nothing exists at all; everything exists
merely by convention, but everything exists without existing naturally. The
point of error for the Functionalists and those other schools is their failure to
distinguish between these four: two kinds of "nothing exists" and two kinds of
"everything exists."

THAL 'GYUR BA'I LUGS LA BDEN PAR MED DE, RTEN 'BREL YIN PA'I PHYIR, ZHES PA 'DIS RTAG CHAD KYI MTHA' GNYIS KA SEL ZHING , DE YANG DANG POS RTAG MTHA' DANG , GNYIS PAS CHAD MTHA' SEL BA YIN,
According to the Implication system, both extremes--thinking things are
permanent and thinking things have stopped--can be prevented with a single
logical statement: "It cannot exist truly, because it is interdependent." The first
part of the statement keeps us from the extreme of thinking things are
permanent; the second, from the extreme of thinking things have stopped.

CO NE BLA MA RIN PO CHES 'DI GNYIS RE RES KYANG RTAG CHAD KYI MTHA' GNYIS KA SEL BAR GSUNGS KYIN YOD, DE SEL LUGS KYANG BDEN PAR MED DE ZHES PA'I TSIG ZIN GYIS RTAG MTHA' DANG , BDEN PAR MED PA'I SHUGS LA SPYIR MED PA MA YIN PAR BSTAN PAS 
CHAD MTHA' SEL, RTEN 'BREL YIN PA'I PHYIR ZHES PA'ANG 'DIS MTSON NUS PAR GSUNGS,
My own precious teacher, Chone Lama,168
was always saying that both parts
of the statement each prevent both of the extremes--permanence and stopping.
He would explain this as follows: the literal sense of the statement's first part,
"It cannot exist truly," serves to prevent the extreme of thinking things are
permanent. The implication of saying that something cannot exist "truly"
though is to say that, more generally, it is not non-existent; this then disallows
the extreme of thinking that things have stopped. And this description, he
would say, was enough for us to figure out for ourselves the process for the
second part of the statement: "...because it is interdependent."

DES NA DPAL LDAN ZLA BAS KYANG ,
,DE PHYIR RTEN 'BYUNG RIGS PA 'DI YIS NI,
,LTA NGAN DRA BA MTHA' DAG GCOD PAR BYED,
,CES GSUNGS PA RED,
With this understanding we can see why the glorious Chandrakirti stated:
Therefore this proof employing interdependence
Cuts the net of every mistaken view.169

DE LTAR CHOS THAMS CAD BDEN PAR MED PA DANG RTEN 'BREL YIN PA'I RTAGS KYIS MTHA' GNYIS KA SEL BAS NA, RTZA SHE LAS,
So we've shown that no object in the universe exists truly; we've given
"because it's interdependent" as our reason for saying so; and we've
demonstrated that these two facts can prevent one from falling into either
extreme. This too is why we see statements like the following, from Root
Wisdom:

,GANG LA STONG PA NYID RUNG BA,
,DE LA THAMS CAD RUNG BAR 'GYUR,
,CES DANG ,
Everything is right for any thing
For which the state of emptiness is right.170

MDO LAS KYANG ,
,GZUGS STONG PA'O,
,STONG PA NYID GZUGS SO,
,ZHES SOGS GSUNGS,
Or the well-known sutra lines:
Form is emptiness,
Emptiness form.171

'DI YANG RTEN 'BYUNG STONG PA DANG , STONG PA RTEN 'BYUNG GI DON DU GSUNGS PA YIN, DE BZHIN DU NGA STONG PA'O, , STONG PA NYID NGA'O, , ZHES SBYAR NA GO BAD BDE BAR 
These last lines by the way are stated to show that interdependence is itself
empty, and emptiness itself interdependent. It helps your understanding of
this point if you take the same pattern and read it as
I am emptiness,
Emptiness me.

'DUGMDOR BSDU NA, RANG BZHIN GYIS STONG PA LA RGYU 'BRAS THAMS CAD 'THAD, MTHA' GNYIS LA MA LHUNG BA ZHIG BYUNG NA LTA BA'I GOL SA GZHAN MI 'BYUNG GSUNGS,
In short, concluded our Lama, the laws of cause and effect are all totally
proper for any entity which is empty of any natural existence. If you can just
keep yourself from falling into the two extremes, you will make no great other
blunders in your effort to develop correct view.

PRACTICE
XIX. Put Into Practice What You Have Learned

BZHI PA NGES PA RNYED NAS SGRUB PA LA BSKUL BAR GDAMS PA NI,
We have now reached the last, the fourth part to our overall explanation of the
actual body of the text. It consists of some strong words of
encouragement--that the reader should try to recognize the truth of these
instructions and then actually go and practice them. As the final verse of the
root text says,

,DE LTAR LAM GYI GTZO BO RNAM GSUM GYI,
,GNAD RNAMS RANG GIS JI BZHIN RTOGS PA'I TSE,
,DBEN PA BSTEN TE BRTZON 'GRUS STOBS BSKYED NAS,
,GTAN GYI 'DUN MA MYUR DU SGRUBS SHIG BU,
,ZHES PAS BSTAN TE,
(14)
When you've grasped as well as I the essential points
Of each of the three principal paths explained,
Then go into isolation, my son, make mighty
Efforts, and quickly win your ultimate wish.

DE LTAR LAM GYI GTZO BO RNAM PA GSUM GYI GNAD RNAMS THOS BYUNG GIS RTOGS NAS, BSAM BYUNG GI BLOS NGES SHES RNYED PA'I MTSAMS SU TSE 'DI'I 'KHRI BA BCAD, 'DOD CHUNG CHOG SHES DANG , DON NYUNG BYA NYUNG LA GNAS TE DBEN PA'I GNAS SU BRTZON 'GRUS KYI STOBS BSKYED NAS TSE RABS GTAN GYI 'DUN MA DE PHYI BSHOL GYI DBANG DU MI GTONG BAR MYUR DU SGRUBS SHIG BU ZHES RANG CAG RJES 'JUG RNAMS LA THUGS BRTZE BA CHEN 
POS GCES PAR GDAMS PA YIN,
This verse is a very personal instruction that Lord Tsongkapa, out of deepest
feelings of love, has granted to all of us who hope to follow him. He is saying
to us, "Go first and try to grasp the essential points of the three principal paths
as I have explained them above; do so by listening to teachings on them over
and over again.
"Then use contemplation to gain a recognition of the truth of these points; do
this in retreat, staying in a state of isolation where you cut all ties to this life,
and live according to the principle of having few material wants and being
satisfied with whatever you have--keep your concerns and activities few.
Make mighty efforts at this practice; act quickly, never lose yourself to putting
off your practice; and then win, my son, the ultimate wish of all your many
lifetimes."

RJE'I GSUNG 'DI TZAM LA YANG GNAD CHEN PO YOD DE, DBEN PA ZHES PA PHYI'I SDOD SA'I GNAS 'DU 'DZIS DBEN PA DANG , NANG GI SEMS CHOS BRGYAD DANG RNAM RTOG MANG POS RGYAL KHAMS BSKOR BA DE TSO LAS DBEN PA'I DON,
There are profound essential points even within these words the Lord has used
about essential points. The word "isolation," for example, is meant to refer to
isolating yourself not only on the outside--staying in some place far from the
hustle and bustle of life--but within your own mind: keep your mind from
making its usual intercontinental tour of the eight worldly thoughts and your
thousand daily hopes and fears.172

BRTZON 'GRUS KYANG MI DGE BA LA 'BAD PA CHEN PO BYED PA BRTZON 'GRUS SU MI 'GRO , DGE BA LA SPRO BZHIN DU BRTZON PA DGOS,
"Making efforts" has its own special meaning: we don't say for example that
you are "making efforts" when you are trying your hardest to do some bad
deed. Real "efforts" are those you make with an enthusiasm for good.

GTAN GYI 'DUN MA NI 'DI NAS SANGS RGYAS PA'I BAR GYI DON LA BYA BAS, DE SGRUB PA YANG TSE LA NGES PA MED PAS MYUR DU 'BUNGS SHIG CES GSUNGS PA RED,
"Your ultimate wish" in a sense really starts from now, and continues on up to
the point where you become a Buddha yourself. And what the verse is saying
is that you must put all your strength into winning your goal now, quickly, for
you cannot be sure how many days are left in your life.

BRTZON 'GRUS KYI STOBS BSKYED LUGS KYANG RANG RE RNAMS KYIS DE RING MTSAMS BSNYEN SGRUB LTA BU'I 'GO BTZUGS NA DO NUB TZAM NAS LHA'I ZHAL GZIGS LUNG BSTAN RMI LTAS TSUN CHAD KYI SGRUB RTAGS THON RGYU'I RE BA BYED PA   
Just what does it mean to "make mighty efforts?" People like you an I can start
a practice in the morning, like going into retreat to gain a special relationship
with some holy being, and by the time evening comes around we begin
looking for some mystical sign that the practice is having its effect--we expect
by then to meet some deity face to face, or hear some voice that tells us we are
going to get enlightened on such and such a date, or have some special dream
or vision.

   DE 'DRAS CHOS MI YONG BAS DE LTA BU MA YIN PAR, STON PA THUGS RJE CAN GYIS KYANG SANGS RGYAS KYI GO 'PHANG BSKAL PA GRANGS MED GSUM DU BSGRUBS PAR GSUNGS NA NGAS SKYE BA 'BUM PHRAG TZAM DU BSGRUB DGOS PA BYUNG YANG BSGRUB NUS SNYAM PAR BYAS TE,
But that's not what religious practice is all about. The scriptures say that even
our compassionate Teacher, the Lord Buddha, had to practice for three
"countless" eons173
before he attained the state of enlightenment. You and I
then have to think to ourselves, "I am ready to spend no less than a hundred
thousand lifetimes in my practice, if this is what it takes."

BYANG CHUB LAM GYI RIM PA LA THOS BSAM SGOM GSUM YUN BSRINGS TE LAM GYI GTZO BO RNAM GSUM GYI NYAMS RTOGS BZANG PO RAB ZHAG SKYED, 'BRING ZLA SKYED, THA MAR LO SKYED THON PA ZHIG AE YONG BLTA DGOS,
We must spend much time in learning, and reasoning out, and then meditating
on the various Steps on the path to Buddhahood. To do this we have to set a
goal for ourselves, for practicing and then fully realizing the three principal
paths: we have to say, "At best, I am going to gain them in a day. If it takes

me a month, I'll consider it average. But at the very least I will see that I have
them within this year."

BKA' GDAMS PA'I DGE BSHES DOL PAS KYANG , LAM RIM LAM RIM ZHES PA DE'ANG TSIG GSUM YIN, MIG RGYANG BSRING , BLO RGYA BSKYED, KHONG GSANG LHOD,
We should follow the words of Geshe Dolpa, one of the
Seers of the Word, who said:
Steps of the path! Steps of the path!
They all come down to three short words:
"Look far ahead,"
"Think very big,"
"Keep a pace."174

CES GSUNGS PA LTAR MIG RGYANG BSRING STE SANGS RGYAS KYI SAR 'GRO BA'I 'DUN PA BTANG , BLO RGYA BSKYED DE NGAS SANGS RGYAS KYI GO 'PHANG DE SKYES BU GSUM DANG , SNGAGS BSKYED RDZOGS KYI LAM LA RIM GYIS SBYANGS TE NGES PAR THOB PAR BYA DGOS BSAM PAR BYED,
What he meant by the expression "Look for ahead" was that we should set our
sights on becoming a Buddha. "Thinking big" means we should think to
ourselves, "To reach my enlightenment, I'm going to practice absolutely all the
paths, one by one: those of the three increasing scopes, and those of the secret
teaching--the levels of creation and completion."

DE YANG 'JIG RTEN LA MI TSE LO GCIG LAS MI SDOD PA ZHIG YIN YANG SHES RGYUD NGANG RING POS LO BRGYA TZAM SDOD RTZIS KYI GRABS BYED, CHOS LA NGED TSO SHES RGYUD NGANG THUNG THUNG BYAS TE, THOS BSAM SGOM GSUM DANG , MA MTHAR KHA TON BZLAS BRJOD PHRAN BU RE BYED KHUL BYAS PA TSUN CHAD GANG NYUNG SHOS, GANG LAS SLA SHOS SHIG LA 'DAM GA BTANG NAS NGAS 'DI TZAM MA GTOGS GA NAS NUS SNYAM DU SHES RGYUD NGANG THUNG THUNG BYED KYANG ,
Now in the worldly side of things, people who know they must die within the
year still make grand plans and act as if they're going to live a hundred. In
the spiritual side of things, you and I are the opposite: we set our sights as low
as we can when it comes to the threefold practice of learning, contemplating
and meditating--even down to the few prayers we're supposedly reciting
daily. We always pick out the easiest practice possible--we always think
small, we think "This is about all I could manage."

DE LTAR MIN PAR RANG GIS BYAS NA SANGS RGYAS KYI GO 'PHANG YANG NGES PAR 'THOB NUS TE, SPYOD 'JUG LAS,
But you're wrong: if you really put forth the effort, there's no question that you
can even become a Buddha. As The Bodhisattva's Life says,

,BDAG GIS BYANG CHUB GA LA ZHES,
,SGYID LUG PAR NI MI BYA STE,
,'DI LTAR DE BZHIN GSHEGS PA NI,
,BDEN PA GSUNG BAS BDEN 'DI GSUNGS,
Don't be a quitter, and think to yourself
"How could I ever become a Buddha?"
Those who've Gone That Way only speak
The truth, and this is a truth they spoke:

,SBRANG BU SHA SBRANG BUNG BA DANG ,
,DE BZHIN SRIN BUR GANG GYUR PA,
,DES KYANG BRTZON PA'I STOBS BSKYED NA,
,BYANG CHUB THOB DKA' BLA MED 'THOB,
"Even those who live as bugs,
Flies or gnats, and even germs,
Reach matchless, hard-won Buddhahood
If they really make an effort."

,BDAG LTA RIGS KYI MIR SKYES LA,
,PHAN DANG GNOD PA NGO SHES NAS,
,BYANG CHUB SPYOD PA MA BTANG NA,
,BDAG GIS BYANG CHUB CIS MI 'THOB,
,CES GSUNGS,
Here am I born as a man,
Able to tell what's right and wrong;
What's to keep me from getting enlightened
If I keep on acting an enlightened way?175

DES NA 'JIG RTEN LA BLO RGYA GANG CHUNG DANG , CHOS LA BLO RGYA GANG CHE CHE BYAS TE CHOS BSGRUB DGOS,
Therefore you should think as small as you can in your worldly work, but as
BIG as you can in your spiritual.

KHONG GSANG LHOD CES PA SKABS RER BRTZON PA SHUGS DRAG BSKYED, SKABS RER SKYID NYAL BAG YANGS BYAS TE CHOS BSKYUR GCIG BYED PA DE 'DRA MIN PAR, DGE SBYOR LA BRTZON 'GRUS THANG LHOD RAN PA ZHIG GI THOG NAS NYAMS LEN CHU BO'I RGYUN LTAR BSKYANGS PAS DAL BA'I RTEN LA SNYING PO RAB TU LON PA ZHIG CI NAS KYANG MDZAD DGOS PA YIN GSUNGS,
Now the words "Keep a pace" mean that you should avoid the kind of practice
where you go back and forth between making fierce efforts at it and then
letting it go completely--laying around and doing nothing. You should rather
keep a steady pace in the effort you give your spiritual practice: let it flow on
constant, like some great river. Do anything in your power, our Lama
concluded, to draw the very essence from this life of opportunity.

IN CONCLUSION
XX. The Conclusion of the Explanation

GSUM PA BSHAD PA MTHAR PHYIN PA MJUG GI BYA BA NI,
ZHES PA 'DI NI MANG DU THOS PA'I DGE SLONG BLO BZANG GRAGS PA'I DPAL 
GYIS TSA KHO DBON PO NGAG DBANG GRAGS PA LA GDAMS PA'O,
,ZHES PA'I MDZAD BYANG GIS BSTAN PA YIN,
This brings us to the last of the major divisions of the work: closing remarks
that come with the conclusion of our explanation of the text. These are
indicated in the colophon that appears after the last verse of the root text:
These instructions were imparted to Ngawang Drakpa, a friar
from the Tsako district, by that very learned Buddhist monk,
the glorious Lobsang Drakpa.176

DE LTAR LAM GYI GTZO BO RNAM GSUM LA THOS BSAM GYI NGES SHES DPYIS PHYIN PA'I 'OG TU, RTOGS PA DON DU GNYER BA DAG GIS BSGOM STE DMIGS PA SKYONG BAR 'DOD NA,
Now some of you, by listening and thinking carefully about the three principal
paths as we've explained them above, might finally have come to some real
recognition of what they mean--and you may wish to go on to the next step:
meditating on these paths, so you can actually grow them in your mind. Here
you will need to know the proper series of visualizations.177

GZHUNG 'DI'I THOG MAR, RJE BTZUN BLA MA RNAMS LA PHYAG 'TSAL LO, , ZHES PAS SNGON 'GRO TSOGS ZHING GSAL 'DEBS DANG , BSAGS SBYANG SOGS BYA DGOS PAR DON GYIS BSTAN PA LTAR SBYOR CHOS SOGS BDE MYUR LTAR DANG ,
The very first line of the root text, "I bow to all the high and holy lamas," tells
us--in an indirect way--the first steps we will have to take. These will include
visualizing the traditional assembly of holy beings, what we call the "Collection

Field,"178
as well as going through the practices of collecting great loads of good
deeds, and purifying ourselves of our bad deeds. In short, we will have to use
one of the "preliminary practice" or similar texts, related either to Path of Bliss
or Quick Path. 179

KUN SLONG GI DMIGS SKOR DU'ANG LAM GYI LUS YONGS RDZOGS GSAL 'DEBS DGOS, KUN SLONG KHYAD PAR CAN BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS KYIS ZIN PA'I SGO NAS DAL 'BYOR DON CHEN RNYED DKA' SOGS BSAMS PAS DE DAG CHUNG 'BRING GI LAM DNGOS SU MI 'GYUR BAR THUN MONG BAR 'GYUR BA'I KHYAD PAR THON PA 'ONG ,
Even just in the sections there where you raise a correct motivation, you are
going to have to do a complete mental review of the entire length of the path,
from beginning to end. This means that you will also be giving thought to
those Steps of the path where you try to recognize how valuable your life of
leisure and fortune is, how hard such a life is to find, and so on. There is a
very important difference here if, as you go along in the meditation, you keep
your mind filled with a truly exceptional motivation--the wish to become a
Buddha for every living being, the attitude of the highest scope. Then the
realizations that come to you at these particular Steps will be for you paths
that you merely share with people of the lesser and medium scopes, rather
than the actual paths or attitudes as these people have them.180

SKYABS YUL BDE MYUR LTAR RAM 'DI'I TSOGS ZHING LTAR GANG BYED KYANG CHOG, BDUD RTZI 'OD ZER LA 'KHRIL TE 'BEBS PA'I LUGS DANG , 'OD KYI SBU GU LAS 'BEBS PA'I LUGS GNYIS YOD,
When you come to the part where you go for refuge, you can use either
system--the one in Path of Bliss and Quick Path or the one from the Collection
Field painting related to this teaching--for visualizing the beings who are
going to shelter you. There are two ways as well of picturing how the
ambrosia descends from them to purify you: it can pulse or twist down along
the outside of a light ray, or else flow down to you through the inside of a
tube-like ray.

SDIG SGRIB RNAMS RTZA BA SNYING DBUS KYI BDAG GCES 'DZIN LAS BYUNG BA MTSON PHYIR SNYING GAR NAG PHUNG NGER YOD PAR BSAM PA YIN,
What the ambrosia has to purify is our past bad deeds and all the things that
block our spiritual progress. The root of all these problems is the tendency we
have, at the very bottom of our hearts, to cherish ourselves rather than others.
Therefore you imagine all the bad deeds and blocks piled in a pitch-black lump
in this same place: within your heart.

DE DAG BDUD RTZIS DED PAS SA 'OG NAS 'CHI BDAG PHAG MO NAG PO'I RNAM PAR RANG SROG LA RNGAMS STABS KYIS 'ONGS PA'I KHAR SONG BAS KHO TSIMS NAS NAM YANG MI 'TSE BAR BYAS SONG BSAM PA GNAD CHE,
The ambrosia-light drops through your body and forces all the blackness down
ahead of it. Underground, sitting below you, is the lord of Death in the form
of a huge black sow.181
She has come because she hungers for your life, and
her jaws are opened wide, pointed up, waiting. It is extremely important at
this point that you imagine the blackness dropping into her open mouth--that
it satisfies her fully, and that she will never again seek to harm you.

SKYABS 'GRO'I RGYU GNYIS BCOS MA TZAM DU SONG NA SKYABS 'GRO YANG DE DANG 'DRA,
As you take your refuge, you keep your mind on the two reasons for doing
so.182
If these two feelings are for you just artificial, and forced, your refuge
will be no better. But if they are true feelings, your refuge too will be true.

DE GNYIS MTSAN NYID PA ZHIG BYUNG NA SKYABS 'GRO YANG MTSAN NYID PA ZHIG 'BYUNG , SEMS BSKYED 'BRAS BU LAM BYED KYI SKABS BCUD KYI SDIG SGRIB SBYANGS PAS SNOD KYI SKYON RNAMS KYANG DE'I BDAG 'BRAS YIN PAS SBYANG BAR BSAM DGOS, 'DI GNAD CHE BA RGYUD SDE CHEN PO'I DKYIL 'KHOR RGYAL MA CHOG DANG KHUNGS 'DRA BA YIN,
At the stage in your meditation where you practice the wish to become
enlightened for every living being, there is a point where you imagine that you
have already reached the goal, in order to help you actually do so later. Here
you visualize that all the inhabitants of the universe are pure, free of any bad
deeds or spiritual obstacles. The universe itself, the place which these beings
inhabit, is a product of their collective deeds--and so you must imagine that
it too is completely pure. This instruction is of high importance; it comes from
the same source as the holy practices in the great secret traditions where you

become the lord of a mystical world.

TSAD MED SKABS TSANGS PA'I GNAS PA BZHI TZAM MIN PAR SNYING RJE CHEN PO, BYAMS PA CHEN PO SOGS KYI KHYAD PAR YOD TSUL YANG SHES DGOS,
Next in the meditation you come to the practice of the "immeasurables";183
here
you must be aware that they are not just what they call the "four places of the
Pure One," but rather something quite different. The compassion, for example,
is not just that ordinary type: it is Great Compassion. And the loving-kindness
is Great Loving-Kindness.

BTANG SNYOMS SNGON DU BYED PA RGYU 'BRAS MAN NGAG BDUN GYI SKABS LTAR GNAD CHE,
As for the order of the four immeasurables, it is important that you meditate
first on the feeling of neutrality towards all beings; this then matches the
feeling's position in the seven-part, cause-and-effect instruction for developing
the wish to become a Buddha for every living being.

KHYAD PAR GYI SEMS BSKYED 'DI SEMS BSKYED DNGOS MIN YANG SEMS BSKYED SPEL BA LA KHYAD CHE BA YOD,
The next section in the meditation is the one we call the "special wish for
Buddhahood."184
It is not the wish itself, but it is very effective in furthering
one's development of the wish.

TSOGS ZHING SKABS, DPAG BSAM GYI SHING NI RANG GI BSOD NAMS DANG TSOGS ZHING RNAMS KYI THUGS BSKYED ZUNG 'BREL LAS BYUNG BA RED, SKU MDOG DKAR POR BYED PA SGRIB GNYIS DAG PA'I KHYAD PAR MTSON,
Here are some notes about the next step in the meditation, where you visualize
the "Collection Field." There is a magical tree at the base of the picture, a tree
that gives you whatever you wish. You should imagine that it has grown from
a union of your own merit and the enlightenment-wish of the beings of the
assemblage. Lord Tsongkapa, at the center of the group, is white; this
symbolizes the quality he possesses and which we would like to achieve:
cleaning ourselves of both kinds of obstacles--those that prevent us from
reaching nirvana and those that prevent us from reaching total enlightenment.

G-YON GYI GLEGS BAM STONG PHRAG BRGYAD PAR GSAL DGOS PA GDUL BYA DBANG PO RNO RTUL GYI KHYAD PAR DANG DGOS PA YOD PAR YONGS 'DZIN RDO RJE 'CHANG GI GSUNG RGYUN YIN PAR GSUNGS GSUNGS,
To Lord Tsongkapa's own left is a volume of scripture, which you should
visualize as the Eight Thousand Verses on the perfection of wisdom.185
This is
meant to symbolize the varying levels and needs that various disciples have,
depending on how sharp their intellects are. These points, our Lama told us,
were an oral teaching from his own teacher, the Great Tutor--the Holder of the
Diamond.186

GLEGS BAM GYIS RANG SGRA SGROGS TSUL LA'ANG NGES 'BYUNG DANG SEMS BSKYED TSUL SOGS RANG GIS GANG NYAMS SU LEN PA DE'I SGRA SGROGS PAR BSAM DGOS, SEMS DPA' SUM BRTZEGS KYI GNAD KYANG GSUNGS,
The volume of scripture in your meditation is speaking out loud, relating to
you its contents. You should imagine that the book is talking about the very
practices you are working on--renunciation, the wish to become a Buddha for
all beings, and so on. Our Lama went on to give us some special instructions
on the "threefold being," where we picture a holy being inside Lord
Tsongkapa's heart, and yet another holy being within this being's heart.

NYAMS LEN BYIN BRGYUD SKABS MKHYEN SRID MA LTAR LA, RDO RJE 'CHANG MA GTOGS GZHAN THAMS CAD 'JAM DBYANGS KYI RNAM PAR BSAM, BLA MCHOD SKABS KYI NYAMS LEN BYIN BRGYUD KYANG PHYAG CHEN DANG 'BREL MA 'BREL GYI KHYAD PAR YOD,
When you visualize the teachers of what we call the "Blessings for Practice"
lineage, you should follow the verses known as "Knowledge Unlocks the
World".187
Here you picture that all these figures, with the exception of the
Holder of the Diamond, appear in the form of Gentle Voice. When you
visualize this same lineage in the meditation from the Offering to Lamas
manual,188
there is a distinction of whether you involve it with the practice of
the Great Seal or not.

YI DAM SOGS BDE MYUR LTAR YIN PAS MDUN PHYOGS BLA MED, G-YAS PHYOGS RNAL 'BYOR RGYUD, RGYAB PHYOGS SPYOD RGYUD, G-YON PHYOGS BYA RGYUD DAM,
The tutelary deities and similar beings in the visualization are pictured
according to Path of Bliss and Quick Path. This means that in front you have
those who belong to the group of secret teachings known as the "Unsurpassed."
To the center figure's own right are those of the "Master Practitioner" group;
to the rear are those of the "Activity" group, and to the left those of the
"Action" group.189

YANG NA MDUN DU GSANG 'DUS, G-YAS SU 'JIGS BYED, G-YON DU BDE 
MCHOG,RGYAB PHYOGS SU KYEE RDOR SOGS DANG , DE'I PHYIR RIM BZHIN RNAL 'BYOR RGYUD, SPYOD RGYUD, BYA RGYUD SOGS GSAL 'DEBS,
You can do this visualization another way too. Picture the divine being known
as "Secret Collection" at the front. On the central figure's right is "Frightener,"
on the left is "Highest Bliss," and at the back is "Lo Diamond," or the like.
Outside of them then come deities of the Master Practitioner group, and
outside of them those of the Activity group, then the Action group, and so
on.190

KHRUS KHANG PHYOGS BZHIR BSKYED PA DANG , SHAR PHYOGS SU BSKYED PA, LHO PHYOGS SU BSKYED PA STE LUGS GSUM YOD, TSOGS ZHING RE RE'I SPYAN SNGAR RANG LUS GSUM GSUM DU SPROS, 'DI SOGS RANG LUS MANG POR SPRO BA SA THOB PA'I SKABS RANG LUS MANG POR SPRUL NAS 'GRO DON BYED PA'I SMIN BYED DU'ANG 'GRO,
There are three different ways of visualizing the crystal bath house when you
come to the part where you imagine that you are washing the body of each of
the holy beings as an offering to him. You can make a house appear in each
of the four directions, or to the east, or else to the south. At this point you see
yourself sending out copies of yourself, so that three of you stand before each
member of the assembly. The act of emanating out many bodies of yourself
here and at other places in the meditation has an additional benefit: it serves
to ripen the potential in you of actually learning to emanate yourself. You will
gain this ability when you reach the various bodhisattva levels, and use it for
the good of others.

,GSOL 'DEBS SKABS SU 'DIR MKHYEN SRID MA GTZO BOR BYED DGOS, GTZO BO'I SKU LA LUS DKYIL BLA MCHOD LTAR BKOD KYANG CHOG,
When you get to the final preliminary practice, the supplication, you should
use mainly the text of "Knowledge Unlocks the World." It's permissible here
if you wish to picture the central figure with a "body mandala"--a complete
secret world and its inhabitants, all part of his own body. Use the one that
you find in the Offering to Lamas.191

SBYOR DNGOS MJUG GSUM GZHAN RNAMS KYANG TSANG MA LAM KHRID LAS BYUNG BA LTAR 'DIR SBYAR ZHING , MJUG TU, DGE 'DIS MTSON NAS DUS GSUM DANG 'BREL BA'I, , ZHES SOGS KYI SMON LAM YANG BGYIS NA LEGS,
For all the other parts of the meditation--whether they relate to preliminaries,
to the main meditation itself, or to its proper conclusion--you should refer to
the various texts on the Steps of the path to Buddhahood and apply the
appropriate sections. It is very good if, at the very conclusion of your
meditation session, you can recite a closing prayer starting with the line, "May
this good deed, standing for whatever ones are done..."192

DE LTAR LAM GYI GTZO BO RNAM GSUM 'DI'I KHRID KYANG BYANG CHUB SEMS KYI MNGA' BDAG MGON PO GSER GLING PA DANG ZHAL MI GNYIS PA BDAG GI SKYABS MGON BLA MA RIN PO CHE'I ZHAL SNGA NAS DANG , SKYABS RJE SGRUB KHANG RDO RJE 'CHANG MTSAN BRJOD PAR DKA' BA BLO BZANG NGAG DBANG BSTAN 'DZIN RGYA MTSO DPAL BZANG PO SOGS MKHAS GRUB DAM PA MANG PO'I DRUNG NAS RTZA 'GREL GNYIS KA'I THOG NAS YANG YANG THOB PA LAS,
I have been fortunate enough, our Lama concluded, to receive these
instructions on the Three Principal Paths--on both the verses of the text and
their commentary--at the feet of many saintly, accomplished sages. I heard
them from the holy lips of my own precious Lama, my protector and savior,
who is the lord of the wish to achieve Buddhahood for all beings, and who
was one and the same with the savior Serlingpa.193
And I heard them from my
refuge and lord, the Holder of the Diamond from Drupkang, whose blessed

name my lips are hardly worthy to pronounce: the good and glorious Lobsang
Ngawang Tenzin Gyatso.

DA RES 'DIR LAM GTZO'I RTZA TSIG 'DI'I STENG NAS ZAB KHRID MDOR BSDUS TZAM PHUL ZIN PA YIN PAS, GANG ZHUS PA DE DAG TSANG MAS PHYAG LEN LA THEBS PA ZHIG CIS KYANG NAS BKA' DRIN SKYONG BAR MDZOD,
I have tried here to offer you but a very brief teaching on the three principal
paths, using the lines of the root text as our guide. I beseech every person
here, please be so very kind, as to take what I have offered in my words and
put it into actual practice, to the absolute best that you can.

BDAG GIS JI SNYED SOGS BCAS DGYES BZHIN DU BKA' DRIN STZAL TO, ,
Thus did our Lama bless us, and with joy then uttered the verse with which
we dedicate a great good deed, to the good of every living being.194

PRAYER
XXI. A Disciple's Prayer

,DIR SMON PA,
,RGYAL BA'I DGONGS ZAB MGON PO BYAMS PA DANG ,
,'JAM DBYANGS LAS 'ONGS TSUL GNYIS BSTAN PA'I SROL,
,'DZIN LA DUS GSUM RGYAL BA'I PHRIN LAS NI,
,RGYA MTSO RAB 'BYAMS SPRO DANG SDUD MDZAD RGYAL,
He's the lord who stages and then withdraws the
show, a myriad ocean
Of mighty deeds the Victors in all three times
perform to keep
The teaching tradition that joins both ways,
those passed from Gentle Voice
And from the savior Loving One, the deep thought
of the Victors.195

,MNYAM MED STOBS BCU'I DPAL GYI THUGS GSANG MDZOD,
,GANG LA BRTEN PA MKHYEN GTER SMRA BA'I LHA,
,BLO BZANG GRAGS SNYAN RAB 'BAR ZHAL SGO LAS,
,SKYUGS PA'I DAM CHOS RIN CEN SRID 'DIR LHAM,
He's a god who goes to the matchless mystery
of his mind, a treasure
Resplendent with all ten forces, to speak
the gold mine of the sages;
He's Lobsang Drakpa, of shining fame, and
into this world came
The jewels of the holy dharma spewed out
from his lips.196

,RGYAL BA'I YAB KYIS RGYAL SRAS BYIS PA'I SKUR,
,NYER BSTAN BRGYAD KHRI'I GSUNG GSANG DVANGS MA'I KHU,
,SNYING POR BSDUS LA LAM GTZO RNAM GSUM ZHES,
,DRI MED BSTAN PA'I MKHA' LA NYI LTAR GRAGS,
He's the revered father of all Victors; in the
form of their son, a child197
Gave a teaching that draws the essence of
the nectar from the cream
Of the eighty thousand,198
the mystery of
the Buddhas' speech: we call it
Three Principal Paths, well-known as the sun
in the sky of the immaculate Word.

,ZAB ZAB PHYOGS RE'I TSIG GIS MTSON MIN PA'I,
,YONGS RDZOGS LAM BZANG DON GYI BRGYUD PA YI,
,NYAMS RTOGS GDAMS PA'I GTER BRGYA RDOL BA'I SGRAS,
,SRID ZHI'I KHONG KUN DGE BA'I SNYAN PA 'DZIN,
His lines are none of those empty words,
supposedly deep, incomplete,
But rather spout a thousand riches, advice
from experience
Of each step of the meaning itself, the
high paths in their entirety,
Capturing the glory of good of the world
or peace, wherever.199

,MKHAS BYA'I GNAS LA MI 'JIGS DPA' PO YIS,
,MDO RGYUD TSAD MA'I GZHUNG BZANG GNAM RU CHER,
,'DZAM GLING MKHAS SROL RIGS PA'I NYAG PHRAN 
DAG,SBYOR BAS LOG SMRA'I SNYING LA 'BIG PAR MDZOD,
Come great warrior, who has no fear of what
will make him wise;
Take up the bow of these wonderful books, the
true Word, open and secret;
Use it with the feathered shafts of reasoning,
way of the wise
Throughout the world, pierce the hearts of
those who would teach wrong.

,SRID PA'I BDE LA SRED PAS 'KHYUD PA'I DPAL,
,GTAN BDE'I GSHED MA GTAN GYI MDZA' GROGS SU,
,BRDZU BA'I 'DI SNANG BYA BA KUN BTANG NAS,
,TSE LHAG DON LDAN BYED PAR NAM ZHIG 'GYUR,
When will I decide to give the rest of my
life some meaning?
When will I throw away this lie of
happiness in this life,
The shining embrace of grabbing after
good things in this world,
My forever friend, the foe of my
forever happiness.

,'DI DANG PHYI MAR SKU GNYIS SGRUB PA'I THABS,
,'PHRAL DANG YUN GYI RGYU TSOGS MI DMAN ZHING ,
,RANG DANG GZHAN YANG LAM BZANG BGROD PA'I 
MIG,MKHAS DANG GRUB PA'I RJES SU GTOD NA MDZES,
In this and my future lives may I never
fail to collect
More of the short and long-term causes
which bring me both the bodies;200

May I win the beauty of eyes that guide
myself and others too
On the excellent paths, fixed upon
the wise and adept ahead.

,'DI LTA BDAG 'DRA'I KHUR DU BZOD MIN YANG ,
,'DI 'BAD DAM PA'I LEGS BSHAD RI MOR 'PHOS,
,'DI YI TSIG DON SUG PAS NYEN PA SOGS,
,'DI LA NONGS MCHIS BLA MA'I SPYAN SNGAR 'CHAGS,
This is not a load that the likes of me
could ever bear,
But I've tried my best to put his eloquence
down in black and white.
I may have slipped, and lost some words
or meaning, or the like;
I kneel before my Lama and freely admit
any errors made.

,DE SLAD 'DI BSGRUBS KYIS MTSON RNAM DKAR MTHUS,
,RANG GZHAN YONGS KYI BLO KHA CHOS LA PHYOGS,
,TSE 'DI'I 'KHRI BA CHOD NAS DAL 'BYOR LA,
,SNYING PO MCHOG TU LON PA'I RGYUR GYUR CIG,
By the pure white force in deeds like this
endeavor I've completed
May my thoughts, those of others too, all turn
to the holy dharma.
May it come to cause us all to cut what
ties us to this life,
And help us take best essence from the time
and chance we have.

CES PA 'DI NI, RJE BLA MA BKA' DRIN GSUM LDAN KHYAB BDAG 'KHOR LO'I MGON PO RDO RJE 'CHANG PHA BONG KHA PA DPAL BZANG PO'I ZHAL SNGA NAS, LAM GYI GTZO BO RNAM GSUM RTZA TSIG GI STENG NAS ZAB KHRID LAN MANG DU NOS   
So this is the teaching on the three principal paths given by our lord and lama,
the one who granted us all three kinds of kindness,201
our savior, the god who
stood at the center of our universe, the Holder of the Diamond himself, the
good and glorious Pabongka. He bestowed upon us many times this profound
instruction, using the words of the root text as a guide.

   SKABS KYI ZIN BRIS KHA 'THOR SNGA PHYI KHAG LNGA TZAM YOD PA RNAMS, PHA BLA MA BKA' DRIN 'KHOR MED CHEN PO'I ZHABS RDUL SPYI BOR LEN PA'I BKA' 'BANGS YONGS KYI THA SHAL BAN GZUGS CHOS MED NAD PA 'DAN GRVA SU DHA'I BADZRSA, RNAM 'DREN DAM PA GANG DES YUN RING MO'I BAR DU BYIN GYIS BRLABS SHING , DUS PHYIS RJE DE NYID KYI SKU RUS RING BSREL RIN PO CHE BYIN RLABS KYI GZI 'OD 'BAR BA DNGOS SU BZHUGS PA'I DBEN PA'I GNAS MCHOG BKRA SHIS CHOS GLING DU BSGRIGS PA   
Various records were made on the different occasions that he delivered this
teaching; there were five such manuscripts in the hands of different people.
They have been compiled here by myself, Suddhi Vadzra,202
a monk from the
monastery of Den, a man who ails from his lack of spiritual knowledge, a mere
pretender dressed in robes, the very lowest of the whole great circle of
disciples who have reverently bowed and touched their heads at the holy dust
upon the feet of the great Lama, our dear father, whose kindness defies
repayment.
I was able to complete this work because of the blessings of this highest of
guides himself; those received during the many years I spent at his side while
he was living, and those which even now emanate from his remains, his
precious relics.
I have written these pages where those relics themselves reside, bathed in the
light that blazes from them, at that holy hermitage known as Tashi Chuling.203

   'GRO DON 'PHEL, , , ,
May it help all living beings!
A SECRET KEY
XXII. A Secret Key to the Three Principal Paths

`LAM GTZO'I ZIN BRIS GSANG BA'I LDE MIG NI,
Here is a "Secret Key to the Three Principal Paths,"
consisting of notes composed by Gungtang.204

MCHOD BRJOD KYIS RTZA BA BSHES GNYEN BSTEN TSUL DANG SBYOR BA'I CHOS DRUG BSTAN,
The opening line of Lord Tsongkapa's Three Principal Paths, what we call the
"offering of praise," is meant to indicate the root of all successful
practice--proper reliance on a spiritual teacher--and the six preliminaries.205
 RGYAL BA'I GSUNG RAB KUN GYI SNYING PO'I DON, , ZHES SOGS LAM GYI GTZO BO GSUM LA SO SOR SBYOR TSUL DANG THUN MONG DU SBYOR TSUL GNYIS, BSHAD TSE GO RIM YOD KYANG BSGOM TSE GCIG GIS GCIG ZIN DGOS PA RJES MA GNYI GA'I MTSAMS SBYAR GYIS SHES TE, DE MA BYAS NA DANG PO'I NGES 'BYUNG DE THEG CHEN GYI LAM DU MI 'GRO,
The lines including the one that reads "The essence of all high teachings of the
Victors" can be taken as applying to the three principal paths individually, or
to the three as a whole. When you teach someone these three paths, you go
through them one by one; but when you meditate upon them, each one must
be suffused with the other two. This fact you can ascertain from the
introductory reference to the latter two paths in the very first verse. If you
didn't do your meditations this way, then your feelings of renunciation could
not be considered a path of the greater way.

CHOS SGRUB 'DOD TZAM RE KUN LA YOD KYANG PHYI BSHOL GYIS BSLUS PAS DAL 'BYOR DANG 
MI RTAG PA SBREL NAS GSUNGS,
Everyone gets the urge from time to time to do some spiritual practice, but all
of us are cheated of the chance by our tendency to put our practice off for
another day. This is why, in the root text, Lord Tsongkapa gives the teaching
on this precious life of opportunity right together with the advices on our
approaching death.

'KHOR BA'I SDUG BSNGAL THAMS CAD LAS MI DGE BA LAS BYUNG BAS 'KHOR BA'I NYES DMIGS DANG LAS 'BRAS SBREL NAS GSUNGS,
He also juxtaposes the teaching on the problems of cyclic life and the teaching
on actions and their consequences--for the reason that every pain we feel in
this circle of life is caused by the bad deeds we have done before.

JO BO'I LUGS DANG ZHI LHA'I LUGS BSRES PA'I SEMS SGOM TSUL GSUNGS TE, MA RNAMS ZHES PA'I RNAMS KYI SGRAS SEMS SNYOMS PA DANG , MA ZHES PAS MAR SHES TSIG SNGA MA'I SNYING RJE DANG ,
In the verses where he explains how to meditate on the wish for enlightenment
too he manages to interweave both systems--the one taught by Lord Atisha
and the one which Master Shantideva gave. The fact that the word "mothers"
in these verses is plural is meant to refer to the one system, where you
exchange your self-concern with a concern for others--a kind of even-
mindedness.206
The very mention of the word "mother" at all is meant to refer
to the step in the other system where you recognize that all beings are your
own mother. And the words that come before the mention of "mothers" are
meant to bring out the step of compassion.

NGANG TSUL SNGAR PHAN BTAGS PA'I NGANG TSUL MAR SHES KYI DRIN BSAM LUGS DANG , SLAR PHAN 'DOGS PA MNYAM PA RJE DRIN DRAN LUGS GNYIS KYI PHYI MA 'PHRUL CHE STE, ZHING BZANG PO LA NAS BTAB MA THUB KYI SEMS KHRAL MA GTOGS 'DI LA MANG PO BTAB CES DRIN DU BRTZE BA MED PA LTAR SEMS CAN GYI DON BSGRUB KYANG YUS MI 'BYUNG BA YIN,
When you "think of what's happening"207
here you can do it two ways. You
can think of what other beings did for you in the past when they were your
mothers; this is how you remember their kindness in the step that follows
recognizing them as mothers in the first place, in the one system. On top of
that you can also think of what other beings are doing for you even now, every
day; this is how it's done in the system where you exchange yourself and
others. This second way of doing it gives fantastic results: you no longer have
to worry that you lost your chance to plant this fertile field by repaying their
kindness then, for here they are around you, lots of fields to plant. It's only
your own failure to recognize their present kindness; they are your ticket to
fulfilling the needs of every living being, but you don't give them any credit
for it.

,RGYU LAS BYUNG BA'I RTEN 'BREL LAS KYANG , LUGS 'DIR MDUNG KHYIM GYI TSUL DU RGYU MANG 'BRAS BU LA BRTEN PAS LTOS NAS BTAGS PA'I RTEN 'BREL GTZO BOR MDZAD DE   
Now the concept of interdependence can refer to the fact that things come from
causes. Sometimes though things can be turned all upside down, like spears
that you plant points-up to support a canopy, and we can say in many cases
that "causes" depend on "results." Therefore the system that we use here is
based principally on interdependence in the sense of labelling due to
dependence.

   BTAGS PA'I TSUL YANG , SNGAR BKRA SHIS MI ZER BA'I MI GCIG LA RANG GIS BKRA SHIS ZHES BTAGS NAS ZHAG SHAS SONG BA NA DE LA PHAR BTAGS PA'I BLO MED PAR DE'I NGOS NAS BKRA SHIS GRUB PA 'DRA ZHIG SKYE BA'I NGANG TSUL PHRA MO 'DI RTOGS DKA' STE, GLEGS BAM LAS NGES NGES 'DRA BA NA GRUB MTHA' 'OG MA TSO'I BDAG MED BSHAD PA'I DON BLO NGOR AE 'DUG MAS NAS BLTAS TE MI 'DUG NA LTA BA'I PHYOGS NA MED DO, ,
How does the labelling work? Suppose there's a person who never had the
name "Tashi," and then one day you go and give him the new name "Tashi."208
After a few days you begin to forget that it was you who gave him the name
"Tashi," and he starts looking like he is "Tashi" all on his own. The process by
which your perception changes here is rather subtle and difficult to recognize.
You can read all the books and start to think you know what no-self is, but
then you've got to go back to the lower school systems and work your way up:
make sure you can picture what they think "no-self" means as well. If you
can't then you're probably pretty far from correct view yourself.209

DON DAM RTOGS PA'I SHES RAB MED NA GZHAN GNYIS KYIS MI THAR BA BSHAD NAS DNGOS LA RTEN 'BREL GSUNGS PA 'DI GO NA GO LA, MIN NA GNAS LUGS RTOGS PA'I SKABS MED PA LA DGONGS   
Here in his verses Lord Tsongkapa first makes the statement that, unless you
have the wisdom that perceives ultimate reality, the other two principal paths
can never free you. Then the next thing he mentions, at least directly, is
interdependence. The point he is trying to make is "If you understand
interdependence, you understand ultimate reality; if not, then you don't."

   SHING SNANG BAS YOD MTHA' SEL BAS KYANG YIN TE, DES MED MTHA' SEL BA MTHONG BA LA MI SKUR BA'I RGYANG PHAN YANG 'DOD NA 'DI NI THUN MONG MA YIN NO, ,
And the same can be said for grasping the fact that an understanding of the
appearance of things prevents you from falling into the extreme of thinking
things exist. Even a non-Buddhist school like the so-called "Cast-Offs"210
can
think the opposite: not even they make the mistake of denying that
understanding the appearance of things prevents you from falling into the
extreme of thinking that nothing exists. Therefore the idea that it keeps you
from falling into the first extreme is truly unique.

TSIG NYUNG YANG YONGS 'DZIN RIN PO CHE'I GSUNG GI NYING KHU BSDUS PA YIN PAS GCES PAR ZUNGS SHIG, , 'DI GUNG THANG GSUNG LAS BRIS PA'O, ,
The above are only a few words of instruction, but they represent the
concentrated essence of everything that the Master Tutor, the Precious One, has
taught. Hold them therefore very dear to your heart.
__________

`DAD DAM MTSUNGS MED GZIM LHA KLU DGA' TSAL BAS SPAR BSKRUN MDZAD PA 'GRO DON 'PHEL, , , ,
The original woodblock printing of this text was sponsored by a devotee of
matchless faith and morals, from the house of Hlalu, a veritable garden of
bliss.211
He dedicates this act to the higher good of every living being.

Notes to Reading Ten
167. Once you grasp the secret... Source of quotation not found.
168. precious teacher Chone Lama: Refers to Pabongka Rinpoche's teacher named
Chone Geshe Lobsang Gyatso Trin.
169. Therefore this proof employing interdependence... Quotation from his Entering
the Middle Way, ff. 206b-207a (entry 74).
170. Everything is right... Quotation from f. 15a of Master Nagarjuna's
masterpiece (entry 4).
171. Form is emptiness... From the famous Heart of Wisdom Sutra, f. 259b (entry
20).
172. eight worldly thoughts: They were listed above in section VIII, on "Stopping
Desire for This Life."
173. three "countless" eons: The word "countless" here actually refers to a specific
number--1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,
000,000,000. The length of an "eon" is variously described in Buddhist
scripture, and is tied to cycles in the lifespans of beings; suffice to say it entails
millions of years.
174. Steps of the path! Original source of quotation not found. Pabongka
Rinpoche's Liberation twice credits the three instructions to Gompa Rinchen
Lama (entry 47, ff. 168a, 334a), who is said to have been a student of Lord
Atisha (see Lord Tsongkapa's Greater Steps, entry 61, f. 12a), and of Lord Drom
Tonpa (Blue Annals, entry 94, p. 264). Geshe Dolpa, full name Marshurpa Rok
Sherab Gyatso (1059-1131) was a student of the great Potowa and compiled his
mentor's teachings into a famed text of the Seer tradition entitled the Blue Book
(see its commentary at entry 89).
175. Don't be a quitter... From the chapter on effort in Master Shantideva's
classic (f. 20a, entry 71). "Those who've Gone That Way" refers to the Buddhas.
176. the glorious Lobsang Drakpa: As mentioned in the Foreword, this was Lord
Tsongkapa's ordination name.
177. the proper series of visualizations: The section that follows was included in

Pabongka Rinpoche's commentary for the benefit of his disciples already
familiar with the practice. It is translated here for completeness, but like any
Buddhist teaching requires the personal guidance of a qualified lama for
successful results.
178. Collection Field: Traditional paintings of this visualization are fairly
common; one good example appears in the Newark Museum's catalogue
(illustration P20, p. 170, entry 93). The name of the visualization is meant to
show that these holy beings are the best field in which one can plant the seeds
of his enlightenment: the two collections of merit and wisdom. The symbolism
of the picture is detailed carefully by Pabongka Rinpoche in his Liberation in
Our Hands (ff. 92-102, entry 47).
179. "Path of Bliss" or "Quick Path": See note 119.
180. attitudes as these people have them: As mentioned above (note 20), the
practitioner of lesser scope seeks to save himself from the lower realms. The
practitioner of medium scope hopes to escape from all forms of suffering life,
even the higher realms. The practitioner of the greatest scope shares these
attitudes, but seeks equally to assure that every other being reaches these goals
too.
181. huge black sow: Also stands for ignorance, the root of all our suffering.
182. two reasons for taking refuge: These are (1) to fear the lower realms and
cyclic life in general, and (2) to believe that the three jewels have the power to
protect you (see note 110).
183. the "immeasurables": These are immeasurable loving- kindness, compassion,
joy, and neutrality; they are described in a classic verse, respectively, as
follows:
May all living beings gain happiness and
what causes happiness.
May all living beings escape suffering and
what causes suffering.
May all living beings never be without the
happiness free of every suffering.
May all living beings stay neutral, free of
all like for their friends and dislike
for their enemies.

The four are called "immeasurable" because they are thoughts directed at an
immeasurable number of beings, and because one gains immeasurable merit
from thinking them. There is another set of four attitudes with the same
names, known collectively as the "four places of the Pure One." Pabongka
Rinpoche elsewhere explains that the loving-kindness of this set covers many,
but not all, sentient beings, and so one who meditates upon it is born as a
being like the worldly god named Pure One, whose authority extends over
many, but not all, places. By focussing on all beings, one achieves nirvana
"without a place" (beyond both this suffering world and a lower nirvana) as
the Great Pure One (another name for a full Buddha) (see ff. 308b- 309a, entry
47).
184. special wish for Buddhahood: The lines read "For the sake of all my mother
beings, I will do anything I have to in order to reach precious total
enlightenment, as fast as I can. Thus I will now begin a meditation on the
teaching of the Steps on the path to Buddhahood, using the profound path of
practice that centers upon my lama, my god" (f. 5a, entry 26).
185. Eight Thousand Verses: One of the most famed and eloquent sutras on the
perfection of wisdom, or correct view (entry 83).
186. the Great Tutor, the Holder of the Diamond: Probably refers to Pabongka
Rinpoche's root master, Dakpo Lama Jampel Hlundrup.
187. "Knowledge Unlocks the World": See note 40 on these lines composed by
Lord Tsongkapa himself.
188. "Offering to Lamas" manual: See note 43; the Great Seal is a practice of the
secret teachings.
189. "Unsurpassed" group, etc.: These refer to the four traditional classes of the
secret teachings.
190. "Secret Collection," etc.: The beings mentioned are all forms which the
Buddha takes to give the secret teachings, and belong to the "Unsurpassed"
group.
191. body mandala in the "Offering to Lamas": See pp. 44-7 of the work (entry 51).
192. May this good deed... Final verses of "Knowledge Unlocks the World" (pp.
207-8, entry 65). They read as follows:

May this good deed, standing for whatever
ones are done
By myself and others throughout all
of the three times
Never even for a single moment
in the many
Lives we take give forth its fruit
by turning into something
Which will lead us to the kinds of things
the world hopes for:
Gains that put themselves ahead, or else
some reputation,
Crowds of followers, life's enjoyments,
others' gifts and honors;
Rather may it only bring us enlightenment
unmatched.
By the wondrous blessings of the Victors
and their sons,
By the truth that interdependence
cannot ever fail,
By the might of my willingness to free
all beings myself,
May all that I have prayed for here
so purely come to pass.
193. same with the savior Serlingpa: Again refers to Pabongka Rinpoche's root
teacher, Dakpo Lama Rinpoche (see note 186). Lama Serlingpa, also known as
Dharmakirti (but different from the sage of the same name who composed the
Commentary on Valid Perception), was a great master of the teachings on the
wish for enlightenment. He lived in what is now Indonesia and instructed
Lord Atisha for twelve years (see note 49).
194. to the good of every living being: Among the verses that Pabongka Rinpoche

spoke in his final prayer of dedication was the following. It comes from the
end of The Hundred Gods of Bliss Paradise (see entry 86), which is a
lama-practice text centered on the great Tsongkapa, Lobsang Drakpa:
May whatever virtue I've collected in
this deed of mine
Be of all possible benefit to all beings
and the teachings.
Especially may it help me to illuminate
for long
The inner essence of the teachings
Lobsang Drakpa gave.
195. deep thought of the Victors: "Victors" refers to the Buddhas; in our world, the
instructions of the Steps of the path to Buddhahood have been passed down
along two great lineages: the Steps on correct view through disciples of Master
Nagarjuna, who learned them from the divine being Gentle Voice; and the
Steps on the wish for enlightenment through disciples of Master Asanga, who
heard them from Loving One--the Future Buddha.
It is a tradition of Tibetan poetics to weave a great personage's name into a
verse, often with special marks under the appropriate syllables. Here the
italics stand for Pabongka Rinpoche's full name (see the Foreword).
196. spewed out from his lips: Poetic metaphor based on a traditional belief that
the mongoose vomits up jewels. The "ten forces" are the ten supreme forms
of knowledge possessed by a Buddha, such as knowing perfectly what is actual
and what is not, and exactly how deeds will ripen upon a person. The words
"shining fame" are a pun on the second part of Lord Tsongkapa's ordination
name, Lobsang Drakpa, since drakpa means "famed."
197. their son, a child: Lord Tsongkapa is said to have actually been a Buddha
who appeared to his disciples in the form of a bodhisattva, or a "son of the
Victors." The word "child" is an allusion to the youthful aspect in which
Gentle Voice sometimes appears.
198. eighty thousand: Refers to the 84,000 different masses of teaching or "heaps
of scripture" imparted by the Buddhas (see note 112).
199. world or peace, wherever: Refers in this case to the world and what
transcends it.

200. both the bodies: See note 32. The mental body is caused primarily by
correct view; the physical body by activities motivated by the wish for
enlightenment. See also text related to note 148.
201. three kinds of kindness: In the tradition of the open teachings, a lama pays
his student the kindnesses of granting him personal instructions, oral
transmissions, and formal explanations of scripture. Within the secret
tradition, he allows the student initiation, explanation, and advices.
202. Suddhi Vadzra: Tibetan transliteration for the Sanskrit equivalent of the
name of the Tibetan editor, Lobsang Dorje. His home district was Den Ma, in
the southeast of Tibet (see also Foreword).
203. Tashi Chuling: Pabongka Rinpoche's mountain hermitage; see Foreword.
204. Gungtang: Refers to Gungtang Jampeyang; see note 62. This "Key" to the
Three Principal Paths is found in his collected works (see entry 9) and is
followed by an instruction (entry 8) on how to perform a formal meditation
session upon the three paths, using the lines of Lord Tsongkapa's original text.
205. six preliminaries: The six practices before a meditation session are cleaning
one's room and setting up an altar, putting forth offerings, sitting in the proper
posture and preparing one's mind by the thoughts of seeking refuge and the
wish for enlightenment, visualizing the traditional assemblage of holy beings,
going through the steps of gathering virtue and removing bad deeds, and then
supplicating the lamas. See also note 177.
206. a kind of even-mindedness: The phrase itself is a double entendre, since the
second system's first step is neutrality towards all beings (see section XII, "How
to Develop the Wish for Enlightenment").
207. "think of what's happening": This phrase as well is lifted from the eighth
verse of Lord Tsongkapa's root text, and then played upon.
208. Tashi: A common Tibetan personal name.
209. far from correct view yourself: The tenets of the lower Buddhist schools
concerning "no-self" have been explained above in section XIV, "Why You
Need Correct View."
210. the so-called "Cast-Offs": A philosophical school of ancient India, considered
one of the crudest since they did not accept the concepts of past and future
lives, and the relation between one's past deeds and present experiences.

211. the house of Hlalu: A well-known aristocratic family of old Tibet. Their
principal holdings were located to the northwest of Lhasa, on the road to
Drepung Monastery.